

The Lord of the Rings
BY
J.R.R. Tolkien

Three Rings for the Elven-kings under the sky,
Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone,
Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die,
One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to ﬁnd them,
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.

CONTENTS
J.R.R. TOLKIEN
NOTE ON THE TEXT
NOTE ON THE 50TH ANNIVERSARY EDITION
FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION
PROLOGUE Concerning Hobbits, and other matters

THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING
BOOK ONE
I A Long-expected Party
II The Shadow of the Past
III Three is Company
IV A Short Cut to Mushrooms
V A Conspiracy Unmasked
VI The Old Forest
VII In the House of Tom Bombadil
VIII Fog on the Barrow-downs
IX At the Sign of The Prancing Pony
X Strider
XI A Knife in the Dark
XII Flight to the Ford
BOOK TWO
I Many Meetings
II The Council of Elrond
III The Ring Goes South
IV A Journey in the Dark
V The Bridge of Khazad-duˆ m
VI Lothlo´rien
VII The Mirror of Galadriel
VIII Farewell to Lo´ rien
IX The Great River
X The Breaking of the Fellowship

THE TWO TOWERS
BOOK THREE
I The Departure of Boromir
II The Riders of Rohan
III The Uruk-hai
IV Treebeard
V The White Rider
VI The King of the Golden Hall
VII Helm’s Deep
VIII The Road to Isengard
IX Flotsam and Jetsam
X The Voice of Saruman
XI The Palantı´r
BOOK FOUR
I The Taming of Sme´agol
II The Passage of the Marshes
III The Black Gate is Closed
IV Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit
V The Window on the West
VI The Forbidden Pool
VII Journey to the Cross-roads
VIII The Stairs of Cirith Ungol
IX Shelob’s Lair
X The Choices of Master Samwise

THE RETURN OF THE KING
BOOK FIVE
I Minas Tirith
II The Passing of the Grey Company
III The Muster of Rohan
IV The Siege of Gondor
V The Ride of the Rohirrim
VI The Battle of the Pelennor Fields
VII The Pyre of Denethor
VIII The Houses of Healing
IX The Last Debate
X The Black Gate Opens
BOOK SIX
I The Tower of Cirith Ungol
II The Land of Shadow
III Mount Doom
IV The Field of Cormallen
V The Steward and the King
VI Many Partings
VII Homeward Bound
VIII The Scouring of the Shire
IX The Grey Havens

APPENDICES
A ANNALS OF THE KINGS AND RULERS
I The Nu´ meno´ rean Kings
II The House of Eorl
III Durin’s Folk
B THE TALE OF YEARS
(CHRONOLOGY OF THE WESTLANDS)
C FAMILY TREES (HOBBITS)
D CALENDARS
E WRITING AND SPELLING
I Pronunciation of Words and Names
II Writing
F
I The Languages and Peoples of the Third Age
II On Translation

INDEXES
I Poems and Songs
II Poems and Phrases in Languages Other Than Common Speech
III Persons, Places and Things

MAPS
Copyright
About the Publisher
Works by J.R.R. Tolkien

.

NOTE ON THE TEXT
J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings is often erroneously called a
trilogy, when it is in fact a single novel, consisting of six books plus
appendices, sometimes published in three volumes.
The ﬁrst volume, The Fellowship of the Ring, was published in Great
Britain by the London ﬁrm George Allen & Unwin on 29 July 1954;
an American edition followed on 21 October of the same year, pub-
lished by Houghton Mifﬂin Company of Boston. In the production
of this ﬁrst volume, Tolkien experienced what became for him a
continual problem: printer’s errors and compositor’s mistakes, in-
cluding well-intentioned ‘corrections’ of his sometimes idiosyncratic
usage. These ‘corrections’ include the altering of dwarves to dwarfs,
elvish to elﬁsh, further to farther, nasturtians to nasturtiums, try and say
to try to say and (‘worst of all’ to Tolkien) elven to elﬁn. In a work
such as The Lord of the Rings, containing invented languages and
delicately constructed nomenclatures, errors and inconsistencies
impede both the understanding and the appreciation of serious
readers – and Tolkien had many such readers from very early on.
Even before the publication of the third volume, which contained
much hitherto unrevealed information on the invented languages and
writing systems, Tolkien received many letters from readers written
in these systems, in addition to numerous enquiries on the ﬁner
points of their usage.
The second volume, The Two Towers, was published in England
on 11 November 1954 and in the United States on 21 April 1955.
Meanwhile Tolkien worked to keep a promise he had made in the
foreword to volume one: that ‘an index of names and strange words’
would appear in the third volume. As originally planned, this index
would contain much etymological information on the languages, par-
ticularly on the elven tongues, with a large vocabulary. It proved the
chief cause of the delay in publishing volume three, which in the end
contained no index at all, only an apology from the publisher for its
absence. For Tolkien had abandoned work on it after indexing vol-
umes one and two, believing its size and therefore its cost to be
ruinous.
Volume three, The Return of the King, ﬁnally appeared in England
on 20 October 1955 and in the United States on 5 January 1956.
With the appearance of the third volume, The Lord of the Rings was
published in its entirety, and its ﬁrst edition text remained virtually

unchanged for a decade. Tolkien had made a few small corrections,
but further errors entered The Fellowship of the Ring in its December
1954 second impression when the printer, having distributed the type
after the ﬁrst printing, reset the book without informing the author
or publisher. These include misrepresentations of the original printed
text – that is, words and phrases that read acceptably in context,
but which depart from Tolkien’s wording as originally written and
published.
In 1965, stemming from what then appeared to be copyright prob-
lems in the United States, an American paperback ﬁrm published an
unauthorized and non-royalty-paying edition of The Lord of the Rings.
For this new edition by Ace Books the text of the narrative was reset,
thus introducing new typographical errors; the appendices, however,
were reproduced photographically from the hardcover edition, and
remain consistent with it.
Tolkien set to work on his ﬁrst revision of the text so that a newly
revised and authorized edition could successfully compete on the
American market. This ﬁrst revision of the text was published in
America in paperback by Ballantine Books, under licence from
Houghton Mifﬂin, in October 1965. In addition to revisions within
the text itself, Tolkien replaced his original foreword with a new one.
He was pleased to remove the original foreword; in his check copy,
he wrote of it: ‘confusing (as it does) real personal matters with the
‘‘machinery’’ of the Tale, is a serious mistake’. Tolkien also added
an extension to the prologue and an index – not the detailed index
of names promised in the ﬁrst edition, but, rather, a bald index
with only names and page references. Additionally, at this time the
appendices were greatly revised.
Tolkien received his copies of the Ballantine edition in late January
1966, and in early February he recorded in his diary that he had ‘worked
for some hours on the Appendices in Ballantine version & found more
errors than I at ﬁrst expected’. Soon after this he sent a small number
of further revisions to Ballantine for the appendices, including the
now well-known addition of ‘Estella Bolger’ as wife of Meriadoc in
the family trees in Appendix C. Most of these revisions, which entered
variously in the third and fourth impressions ( June and August 1966)
of volume three, and which were not always inserted correctly
(thereby causing further confusion in the text), somehow never made
it into the main sequence of revision in the three-volume British
hardcover edition, and for long remained anomalies. Tolkien once
wrote, concerning the revising of The Lord of the Rings, that perhaps he
had failed to keep his notes in order; this errant branch of revision
seems likely to be an example of that disorder – either in his notes or
in the ability of his publishers to follow them with utmost accuracy.

The revised text ﬁrst appeared in Great Britain in a three-volume
hardcover ‘Second Edition’ from Allen & Unwin on 27 October 1966.
But again there were problems. Although the revisions Tolkien sent
to America of the text itself were available to be utilized in the new
British edition, his extensive revisions to the appendices were lost
after being entered into the Ballantine edition. Allen & Unwin were
forced to reset the appendices using the copy as published in the ﬁrst
Ballantine edition. This did not include Tolkien’s second, small set
of revisions sent to Ballantine; but, more signiﬁcantly, it did include
a great number of errors and omissions, many of which were not
discovered until long afterwards. Thus, in the appendices, a close
scrutiny of the ﬁrst edition text and of the much later corrected
impressions of the second edition is necessary to discern whether any
particular change in this edition is authorial or erroneous.
In America, the revised text appeared in hardcover in the three-
volume edition published by Houghton Mifﬂin on 27 February 1967.
This text was evidently photo-offset from the 1966 Allen & Unwin
three-volume hardcover, and is thus consistent with it. Aside from
the ﬁrst printing of this second Houghton Mifﬂin edition, which has
a 1967 date on the title page, none of the many reprintings is dated.
After the initial printings of this edition, which bore a 1966 copyright
notice, the date of copyright was changed in 1965 to match the state-
ment in the Ballantine edition. This change has caused a great deal
of confusion for librarians and other researchers who have tried to
sort out the sequence of publication of these editions.
Meanwhile, Tolkien spent much of the summer of 1966 further
revising the text. In June he learned that any more revisions were too
late for inclusion in the 1966 Allen & Unwin second edition, and he
recorded in his diary: ‘But I am attempting to complete my work [on
the revisions] – I cannot leave it while it is all in my mind. So much
time has been wasted in all my work by this constant breaking of
threads.’ This was the last major set of revisions Tolkien himself
made to the text during his lifetime. They were added to the second
impression (1967) of the three-volume hardcover Allen & Unwin
second edition. The revisions themselves mostly include corrections
of nomenclature and attempts at consistency of usage throughout the
three volumes. Some small alterations were made by Tolkien in the
1969 one-volume India paper edition.
J.R.R. Tolkien died in 1973. His third son and literary executor,
Christopher Tolkien, sent a large number of further corrections of
misprints, mainly in the appendices and index, to Allen & Unwin
for use in their editions in 1974. Most of these corrections were
typographical, and in line with his father’s expressed intent in his
own check copies.

Since 1974, Christopher Tolkien has sent additional corrections,
as errors have been discovered, to the British publishers of The Lord
of the Rings (Allen & Unwin, later Unwin Hyman, and now Harper-
Collins), who have tried to be conscientious in the impossible task
of maintaining a textual integrity in whichever editions of The Lord
of the Rings they have published. However, every time the text has
been reset for publication in a new format (e.g. the various paperback
editions published in England in the 1970s and 1980s), huge numbers
of new misprints have crept in, though at times some of these errors
have been observed and corrected in later printings. Still, throughout
these years the three-volume British hardcover edition has retained
the highest textual integrity.
In the United States, the text of the Ballantine paperback has
remained unchanged for more than three decades after Tolkien added
his few revisions in 1966. The text in all of the Houghton Mifﬂin
editions remained unchanged from 1967 until 1987, when Houghton
Mifﬂin photo-offset the then current three-volume British hardcover
edition in order to update the text used in their editions. In those new
reprintings a number of further corrections (overseen by Christopher
Tolkien) were added, and the errant Ballantine branch of revision
(including the ‘Estella Bolger’ addition) was integrated into the main
branch of textual descent. This method of correction involved a cut-
and-paste process with printed versions of the text. Beginning with
the 1987 Houghton Mifﬂin edition, an earlier version of this ‘Note
on the Text’ (dated October 1986) was added to The Lord of the
Rings. This ‘Note’ has been reworked three times since then – the
version dated April 1993 ﬁrst appeared in 1994, and the version dated
April 2002 came out later that year. The present ‘Note’ replaces and
supersedes all previous versions.
For the 1994 British edition published by HarperCollins, the text
of The Lord of the Rings was entered into word-processing ﬁles. This
next stage of textual evolution came about to allow for a greater
uniformity of the text in all future editions, but with it, inevitably,
came new wrinkles. Some new misreadings entered into the text,
while at the same time others were ﬁxed. In the worst instance, one
line of the ring inscription in the chapter ‘The Shadow of the Past’ of
The Fellowship of the Ring was simply dropped. Unforeseeable glitches
arose in other editions when the base computerized text was trans-
ferred into page-making or typesetting programs – e.g., in one edition
of The Fellowship of the Ring, the closing two sentences of ‘The Council
of Elrond’ simply and inexplicably disappeared. Such glitches have
been very much the exception, not the rule, and the text has otherwise
maintained a consistency and integrity throughout its computerized
evolution.

The 1994 edition also contained a number of new corrections
(again supervised by Christopher Tolkien), as well as a reconﬁgured
index of names and page references. The 1994 text was ﬁrst used in
American editions published by Houghton Mifﬂin in 1999. A small
number of further corrections were added into the 2002 three-volume
edition illustrated by Alan Lee, published by HarperCollins in Great
Britain and Houghton Mifﬂin in the United States.
The textual history of The Lord of the Rings, merely in its published
form, is a vast and complex web. In this brief note I have given only
a glimpse of the overall sequence and structure. Further details on
the revisions and corrections made over the years to the published
text of The Lord of the Rings, and a fuller account of its publishing
history, may be found in J.R.R. Tolkien: A Descriptive Bibliography,
by Wayne G. Hammond, with the assistance of Douglas A. Anderson
(1993).
For those interested in observing the gradual evolving of The Lord
of the Rings from its earliest drafts to its published form, I highly
recommend Christopher Tolkien’s account, which appears within
ﬁve volumes of his twelve-volume series The History of Middle-earth.
Volumes six through nine contain the major part of his study per-
taining to The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the Shadow (1988); The
Treason of Isengard (1989); The War of the Ring (1990); and Sauron
Defeated (1992). Also, the ﬁnal book of the series, The Peoples of
Middle-earth (1996), covers the evolution of the prologue and appen-
dices to The Lord of the Rings. These volumes contain an engrossing
over-the-shoulder account of the growth and writing of Tolkien’s
masterpiece.
The process of studying Tolkien’s manuscripts of The Lord of the
Rings involved the deciphering of versions where Tolkien wrote ﬁrst
in pencil and then in ink atop the pencilled draft. Christopher Tolkien
has decribed his father’s method of composition in The Return of the
Shadow: ‘In the handwriting that he used for rapid drafts and
sketches, not intended to endure long before he turned to them again
and gave them a more workable form, letters are so loosely formed
that a word which cannot be deduced or guessed at from the context
or from later versions can prove perfectly opaque after long examin-
ation; and if, as he often did, he used a soft pencil much has now
become blurred and faint.’ The true difﬁculty of reading such double-
drafts can be observed in the frontispiece to The War of the Ring,
which reproduces in colour Tolkien’s illustration of ‘Shelob’s Lair’
from a page of Tolkien’s manuscript. Looking very closely at the
hasty ink draft alongside the illustration, one can see underneath
it the earlier, hastier, pencilled draft. Also in The War of the Ring,

Christopher Tolkien reproduces a page from the ﬁrst manuscript of
the chapter ‘The Taming of Sme´agol’, and the printed text corre-
sponding to this text is on the facing page (see pp. 90–91). One is
astonished at anyone’s ability to decipher such texts.
That difﬁculty aside, just what do these books signify to ordinary
readers and to Tolkien scholars? And what is ‘the history of the
writing’ of a book? Simply, these volumes show in great detail the
development of the story of The Lord of the Rings from its very earliest
drafts and hasty projections through its completion. We see in the
earliest materials what is very much a children’s book, a sequel to
The Hobbit, and as the story grows through various ‘phases’, there is
an increase in seriousness and depth. We see alternate branches of
development, the gradual blending and merging of certain characters,
and the slow emergence of the nature of the rings and of the motiv-
ations of other characters. Some of these various ideas are abandoned
altogether, while others are reworked into some variant form that
may or may not survive into the ﬁnal version.
One could make a whole catalogue of interesting tidbits from
Christopher Tolkien’s study – such as the fact that Strider was called
Trotter until a very late stage in the writing of the book; that Trotter
was at one time a hobbit, so named because he wore wooden shoes;
that Tolkien at one point considered a romance between Aragorn
´
and Eowyn; that Tolkien wrote an epilogue to the book, tying up
loose ends, but it was dropped before publication (and now appears
in Sauron Defeated ); and so on. But these developments are best
appreciated when read within the context of Christopher Tolkien’s
commentary rather than discussed separately.
The most signiﬁcant achievement of these volumes is that they
show us how Tolkien wrote and thought. Nowhere else do we see
the authorial process itself at work in such detail. Tolkien’s hastiest
comments about where the story might proceed, or why it can or
can’t go such and such a way – these queries to himself were written
out: Tolkien is literally thinking on paper. This gives an added dimen-
sion of understanding to Tolkien’s comment to Stanley Unwin in a
1963 letter that, when suffering from trouble with his shoulder and
right arm, ‘I found not being able to use a pen or pencil as defeating
as the loss of her beak would be to a hen.’ And we, as readers
of these volumes, can share with Tolkien himself the wonder and
bewilderment of new characters appearing as if from nowhere, or of
some other sudden change or development, at the very moment of
their emergence into the story.
I know of no other instance in literature where we have such a
‘history of the writing’ of a book, told mostly by the author himself,
with all the hesitations and false paths laid out before us, sorted out,

commented upon, and served up to a reader like a feast. We are
shown innumerable instances in the minutest detail of the thought-
process itself at work. We see the author fully absorbed in creation
for its own sake. And this is all the more exceptional because this
is a history not only of the unfolding of a story and its text, but of
the evolution of a world. There is an additional wealth of material
beyond simple narrative text. There are maps and illustrations. There
are languages and writing systems, and the histories of the peoples
who spoke and wrote in these systems. All of these additional
materials add multiple dimensions of complexity to our appreciation
of the invented world itself.
Fifty years into the published life of The Lord of the Rings, it seems
extraordinary to me that we have not only such a masterful work of
literature but also as a companion to it an unparalleled account of
its writing. Our gratitude as readers goes to both of the Tolkiens,
father and son.
Douglas A. Anderson
May 2004

NOTE ON THE 50TH ANNIVERSARY EDITION
In this edition of The Lord of the Rings, prepared for the ﬁftieth
anniversary of its publication, between three and four hundred emen-
dations have been made following an exhaustive review of past
editions and printings. The present text is based on the setting of
the HarperCollins three-volume hardcover edition of 2002, which in
turn was a revision of the HarperCollins reset edition of 1994. As
Douglas A. Anderson comments in the preceding ‘Note on the Text’,
each of those editions was itself corrected, and each also introduced
new errors. At the same time, other errors survived undetected, among
them some ﬁve dozen which entered as long ago as 1954, in the resetting
of The Fellowship of the Ring published as its ‘second impression’.
That the printer had quietly reset The Fellowship of the Ring, and
that copies had been issued without proof having been read by the
author, never became known to Tolkien; while his publisher, Rayner
Unwin, learned of it only thirty-eight years after the fact. Tolkien
found a few of the unauthorized changes introduced in the second
printing when (probably while preparing the second edition in 1965)
he read a copy of the twelfth impression (1962), but thought the
errors newly made. These, among others, were corrected in the course
of the reprinting. Then in 1992 Eric Thompson, a reader with a keen
eye for typographic detail, noticed small differences between the ﬁrst
and second impressions of The Fellowship of the Ring and called them
to the attention of the present editors. About one-sixth of the errors
that entered in the second printing quickly came to light. Many more
were revealed only recently, when Steven M. Frisby used ingenious
optical aids to make a comparison of copies of The Lord of the Rings
in greater detail than was previously accomplished. We have gladly
made full use of Mr Frisby’s results, which he has generously shared
and discussed.
In the course of its ﬁfty-year history The Lord of the Rings has had
many such readers who have recorded changes made between its
various appearances in print, both to document what has gone before
and to aid in the achievement of an authoritative text. Errors or
possible errors were reported to the author himself or to his pub-
lishers, and information on the textual history of the work circulated
among Tolkien enthusiasts at least as early as 1966, when Banks

Mebane published his ‘Prolegomena to a Variorum Tolkien’ in the
fanzine Entmoot. Most notably in later years, Douglas A. Anderson
has been in the forefront of efforts to achieve an accurate text of The
Lord of the Rings (and of The Hobbit); Christina Scull has published
‘A Preliminary Study of Variations in Editions of The Lord of the
Rings’ in  Beyond Bree (April and August 1985); Wayne G. Hammond
has compiled extensive lists of textual changes in J.R.R. Tolkien: A
Descriptive Bibliography (1993); and David Bratman has published an
important article, ‘A Corrigenda to The Lord of the Rings’, in the
March 1994 number of The Tolkien Collector. The observations of
Dainis Bisenieks, Yuval Kﬁr, Charles Noad, and other readers, sent
to us directly or posted in public forums, have also been of service.
Efforts such as these follow the example of the author of The Lord
of the Rings during his lifetime. His concern for the textual accuracy
and coherence of his work is evident from the many emendations he
made in later printings, and from notes he made for other emen-
dations which for one reason or another have not previously (or have
only partly) been put into effect. Even late in life, when such labours
wearied him, his feelings were clear. On 30 October 1967 he wrote
to Joy Hill at George Allen & Unwin, concerning a reader’s query
he had received about points in the Appendices to The Lord of the
Rings: ‘Personally I have ceased to bother about these minor ‘‘discrep-
ancies’’, since if the genealogies and calendars etc. lack verisimilitude
it is in their general excessive accuracy: as compared with real annals
or genealogies! Anyway the slips were few, have now mostly been
removed, and the discovery of what remain seems an amusing pas-
time! But errors in the text are another matter’ (italics ours). In fact
Tolkien had not ‘ceased to bother’, and ‘slips’ were dealt with as
opportunities arose. These, and the indulgence of his publisher,
allowed Tolkien a luxury few authors enjoy: multiple chances not
only to correct his text but to improve it, and to further develop the
languages, geography, and peoples of Middle-earth.
The ﬁftieth anniversary of The Lord of the Rings seemed an ideal
opportunity to consider the latest (2002) text in light of information
we had gathered in the course of decades of work in Tolkien studies,
with Steve Frisby’s research at hand, and with an electronic copy
of The Lord of the Rings (supplied by HarperCollins) searchable by
keyword or phrase. The latter especially allowed us to develop lists
of words that varied from one instance to another, and investigate
variations in usage, as they stood in the copy-text and relative to
earlier editions and printings. Of course Tolkien wrote The Lord of
the Rings over so long a period of time, some eighteen years, that
inconsistencies in its text were almost inevitable. Christopher Tolkien
even observed to us that some apparent inconsistencies of form in his

father’s work may even have been deliberate: for instance, although
Tolkien carefully distinguished house ‘dwelling’ from House ‘noble
family or dynasty’, in two instances he used house in the latter sense
but in lower case, perhaps because a capital letter would have
detracted from the importance of the adjective with which the word
was paired (‘royal house’, ‘golden house’). There can be no doubt,
however, that Tolkien attempted to correct inconsistency, no less
than outright error, whenever it came to his attention, and it was our
opinion, with the advice and agreement of Christopher Tolkien, that
an attempt should be made to do so in the anniversary edition, in
so far as we could carefully and conservatively distinguish what to
emend.
Many of the emendations in the present text are to marks of
punctuation, either to correct recent typographical errors or to repair
surviving alterations introduced in the second printing of The Fellow-
ship of the Ring. In the latter respect and in every case, Tolkien’s
original punctuation is always more felicitous – subtle points, when
one is comparing commas and semi-colons, but no less a part of the
author’s intended expression. Distinctive words such as chill rather
than cold, and glistered rather than glistened, changed by typesetters
long ago without authorization, likewise have been restored. A
controlled amount of regularization also seemed called for, such as
naught rather than nought, a change instituted by Tolkien but not
carried through in all instances; Dark Power rather than dark power
when the reference is obviously to Sauron (or Morgoth); Barrow-
downs by Tolkien’s preference rather than Barrowdowns; likewise Bree-
hill rather than Bree Hill; accented and more common Dru´adan rather
than Druadan; capitalized names of seasons when used as personiﬁ-
cation or metaphor, according to Tolkien’s predominant practice and
the internal logic of the text; and Elvish rather than elvish when used
as a separate adjective, following a preference Tolkien marked in his
copy of the second edition of The Lord of the Rings. In addition, we
have added a second accent to Nu´meno´rean(s), as Tolkien often wrote
the name in manuscript and as it appears in The Silmarillion and
other posthumous publications.
The result, nonetheless, still includes many variations in capital-
ization, punctuation, and other points of style. Not all of these are
erroneous: they include words such as Sun, Moon, Hobbit, and Man
(or sun, moon, hobbit, man), which may change form according to
meaning or application, in relation to adjacent adjectives, or whether
Tolkien intended personiﬁcation, poetry, or emphasis. His intent
cannot be divined with conﬁdence in every case. But it is possible to
discern Tolkien’s preferences in many instances, from statements
he wrote in his check copies of The Lord of the Rings or from a

close analysis of its text in manuscript, typescript, proof, and print.
Whenever there has been any doubt whatsoever as to the author’s
intentions, the text has been allowed to stand.
Most of the demonstrable errors noted by Christopher Tolkien in
The History of Middle-earth also have been corrected, such as the
distance from the Brandywine Bridge to the Ferry (ten miles rather
than twenty) and the number of Merry’s ponies (ﬁve rather than six),
shadows of earlier drafts. But those inconsistencies of content, such
as Gimli’s famous (and erroneous) statement in Book III, Chapter 7,
‘Till now I have hewn naught but wood since I left Moria’, which
would require rewriting to emend rather than simple correction,
remain unchanged.
So many new emendations to The Lord of the Rings, and such an
extensive review of its text, deserve to be fully documented. Although
most readers will be content with the text alone, many will want to
know more about the problems encountered in preparing this new
edition, and their solutions (where solutions have been possible),
especially where the text has been emended, but also where it has
not. To this end, and to illuminate the work in other respects, we
are preparing a volume of annotations to The Lord of the Rings for
publication in 2005. This will allow us to discuss, at a length imposs-
ible in a prefatory note, the various textual cruces of The Lord of
the Rings, to identify changes that have been made to the present
text, and to remark on signiﬁcant alterations to the published work
throughout its history. We will also explain archaic or unusual words
and names in The Lord of the Rings, explore literary and historical
inﬂuences, note connections with Tolkien’s other writings, and com-
ment on differences between its drafts and published form, on ques-
tions of language, and on much else that we hope will interest readers
and enhance their enjoyment of Tolkien’s masterpiece.
Wayne G. Hammond & Christina Scull
May 2004

FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION
This tale grew in the telling, until it became a history of the Great
War of the Ring and included many glimpses of the yet more ancient
history that preceded it. It was begun soon after The Hobbit was
written and before its publication in 1937; but I did not go on with
this sequel, for I wished ﬁrst to complete and set in order the myth-
ology and legends of the Elder Days, which had then been taking
shape for some years. I desired to do this for my own satisfaction,
and I had little hope that other people would be interested in this
work, especially since it was primarily linguistic in inspiration and
was begun in order to provide the necessary background of ‘history’
for Elvish tongues.
When those whose advice and opinion I sought corrected little hope
to no hope, I went back to the sequel, encouraged by requests from
readers for more information concerning hobbits and their adven-
tures. But the story was drawn irresistibly towards the older world,
and became an account, as it were, of its end and passing away before
its beginning and middle had been told. The process had begun in
the writing of The Hobbit, in which there were already some references
to the older matter: Elrond, Gondolin, the High-elves, and the orcs,
as well as glimpses that had arisen unbidden of things higher or
deeper or darker than its surface: Durin, Moria, Gandalf, the Necro-
mancer, the Ring. The discovery of the signiﬁcance of these glimpses
and of their relation to the ancient histories revealed the Third Age
and its culmination in the War of the Ring.
Those who had asked for more information about hobbits eventu-
ally got it, but they had to wait a long time; for the composition of
The Lord of the Rings went on at intervals during the years 1936 to
1949, a period in which I had many duties that I did not neglect,
and many other interests as a learner and teacher that often absorbed
me. The delay was, of course, also increased by the outbreak of war
in 1939, by the end of which year the tale had not yet reached the
end of Book One. In spite of the darkness of the next ﬁve years I
found that the story could not now be wholly abandoned, and I
plodded on, mostly by night, till I stood by Balin’s tomb in Moria.
There I halted for a long while. It was almost a year later when I
went on and so came to Lothlo´ rien and the Great River late in 1941.

In the next year I wrote the ﬁrst drafts of the matter that now stands
as Book Three, and the beginnings of chapters I and III of Book
Five; and there as the beacons ﬂared in Ano´rien and The´oden came
to Harrowdale I stopped. Foresight had failed and there was no time
for thought.
It was during 1944 that, leaving the loose ends and perplexities of
a war which it was my task to conduct, or at least to report, I forced
myself to tackle the journey of Frodo to Mordor. These chapters,
eventually to become Book Four, were written and sent out as a
serial to my son, Christopher, then in South Africa with the RAF.
Nonetheless it took another ﬁve years before the tale was brought to
its present end; in that time I changed my house, my chair, and my
college, and the days though less dark were no less laborious. Then
when the ‘end’ had at last been reached the whole story had to be
revised, and indeed largely re-written backwards. And it had to be
typed, and re-typed: by me; the cost of professional typing by the
ten-ﬁngered was beyond my means.
The Lord of the Rings has been read by many people since it ﬁnally
appeared in print; and I should like to say something here with refer-
ence to the many opinions or guesses that I have received or have
read concerning the motives and meaning of the tale. The prime
motive was the desire of a tale-teller to try his hand at a really long
story that would hold the attention of readers, amuse them, delight
them, and at times maybe excite them or deeply move them. As a
guide I had only my own feelings for what is appealing or moving,
and for many the guide was inevitably often at fault. Some who have
read the book, or at any rate have reviewed it, have found it boring,
absurd, or contemptible; and I have no cause to complain, since I
have similar opinions of their works, or of the kinds of writing that
they evidently prefer. But even from the points of view of many who
have enjoyed my story there is much that fails to please. It is perhaps
not possible in a long tale to please everybody at all points, nor to
displease everybody at the same points; for I ﬁnd from the letters
that I have received that the passages or chapters that are to some a
blemish are all by others specially approved. The most critical reader
of all, myself, now ﬁnds many defects, minor and major, but being
fortunately under no obligation either to review the book or to write
it again, he will pass over these in silence, except one that has been
noted by others: the book is too short.
As for any inner meaning or ‘message’, it has in the intention of
the author none. It is neither allegorical nor topical. As the story
grew it put down roots (into the past) and threw out unexpected
branches: but its main theme was settled from the outset by the
inevitable choice of the Ring as the link between it and The Hobbit.

The crucial chapter, ‘The Shadow of the Past’, is one of the oldest
parts of the tale. It was written long before the foreshadow of 1939
had yet become a threat of inevitable disaster, and from that point
the story would have developed along essentially the same lines, if
that disaster had been averted. Its sources are things long before in
mind, or in some cases already written, and little or nothing in it was
modiﬁed by the war that began in 1939 or its sequels.
The real war does not resemble the legendary war in its process
or its conclusion. If it had inspired or directed the development
of the legend, then certainly the Ring would have been seized and
used against Sauron; he would not have been annihilated but en-
slaved, and Barad-duˆr would not have been destroyed but occupied.
Saruman, failing to get possession of the Ring, would in the confusion
and treacheries of the time have found in Mordor the missing links
in his own researches into Ring-lore, and before long he would have
made a Great Ring of his own with which to challenge the self-styled
Ruler of Middle-earth. In that conﬂict both sides would have held
hobbits in hatred and contempt: they would not long have survived
even as slaves.
Other arrangements could be devised according to the tastes or
views of those who like allegory or topical reference. But I cordially
dislike allegory in all its manifestations, and always have done so
since I grew old and wary enough to detect its presence. I much
prefer history, true or feigned, with its varied applicability to the
thought and experience of readers. I think that many confuse ‘applica-
bility’ with ‘allegory’; but the one resides in the freedom of the reader,
and the other in the purposed domination of the author.
An author cannot of course remain wholly unaffected by his experi-
ence, but the ways in which a story-germ uses the soil of experience
are extremely complex, and attempts to deﬁne the process are at best
guesses from evidence that is inadequate and ambiguous. It is also
false, though naturally attractive, when the lives of an author and
critic have overlapped, to suppose that the movements of thought or
the events of times common to both were necessarily the most power-
ful inﬂuences. One has indeed personally to come under the shadow
of war to feel fully its oppression; but as the years go by it seems
now often forgotten that to be caught in youth by 1914 was no less
hideous an experience than to be involved in 1939 and the following
years. By 1918 all but one of my close friends were dead. Or to take
a less grievous matter: it has been supposed by some that ‘The Scour-
ing of the Shire’ reﬂects the situation in England at the time when I
was ﬁnishing my tale. It does not. It is an essential part of the plot,
foreseen from the outset, though in the event modiﬁed by the charac-
ter of Saruman as developed in the story without, need I say, any

allegorical signiﬁcance or contemporary political reference whatso-
ever. It has indeed some basis in experience, though slender (for the
economic situation was entirely different), and much further back.
The country in which I lived in childhood was being shabbily
destroyed before I was ten, in days when motor-cars were rare objects
(I had never seen one) and men were still building suburban railways.
Recently I saw in a paper a picture of the last decrepitude of the once
thriving corn-mill beside its pool that long ago seemed to me so
important. I never liked the looks of the Young miller, but his father,
the Old miller, had a black beard, and he was not named Sandyman.
The Lord of the Rings is now issued in a new edition, and the
opportunity has been taken of revising it. A number of errors and
inconsistencies that still remained in the text have been corrected,
and an attempt has been made to provide information on a few
points which attentive readers have raised. I have considered all their
comments and enquiries, and if some seem to have been passed over
that may be because I have failed to keep my notes in order; but
many enquiries could only be answered by additional appendices, or
indeed by the production of an accessory volume containing much
of the material that I did not include in the original edition, in particu-
lar more detailed linguistic information. In the meantime this edition
offers this Foreword, an addition to the Prologue, some notes, and
an index of the names of persons and places. This index is in intention
complete in items but not in references, since for the present purpose
it has been necessary to reduce its bulk. A complete index, making
full use of the material prepared for me by Mrs. N. Smith, belongs
rather to the accessory volume.

.

P R O L O G U E
1
Concerning Hobbits
This book is largely concerned with Hobbits, and from its pages a
reader may discover much of their character and a little of their
history. Further information will also be found in the selection from
the Red Book of Westmarch that has already been published, under
the title of The Hobbit. That story was derived from the earlier chap-
ters of the Red Book, composed by Bilbo himself, the ﬁrst Hobbit
to become famous in the world at large, and called by him There and
Back Again, since they told of his journey into the East and his return:
an adventure which later involved all the Hobbits in the great events
of that Age that are here related.
Many, however, may wish to know more about this remarkable
people from the outset, while some may not possess the earlier book.
For such readers a few notes on the more important points are here
collected from Hobbit-lore, and the ﬁrst adventure is brieﬂy recalled.
Hobbits are an unobtrusive but very ancient people, more numer-
ous formerly than they are today; for they love peace and quiet and
good tilled earth: a well-ordered and well-farmed countryside was
their favourite haunt. They do not and did not understand or like
machines more complicated than a forge-bellows, a water-mill, or a
hand-loom, though they were skilful with tools. Even in ancient days
they were, as a rule, shy of ‘the Big Folk’, as they call us, and now
they avoid us with dismay and are becoming hard to ﬁnd. They are
quick of hearing and sharp-eyed, and though they are inclined to be
fat and do not hurry unnecessarily, they are nonetheless nimble and
deft in their movements. They possessed from the ﬁrst the art of
disappearing swiftly and silently, when large folk whom they do not
wish to meet come blundering by; and this art they have developed
until to Men it may seem magical. But Hobbits have never, in fact,
studied magic of any kind, and their elusiveness is due solely to a
professional skill that heredity and practice, and a close friendship
with the earth, have rendered inimitable by bigger and clumsier races.
For they are a little people, smaller than Dwarves: less stout and
stocky, that is, even when they are not actually much shorter. Their
height is variable, ranging between two and four feet of our measure.

They seldom now reach three feet; but they have dwindled, they say,
and in ancient days they were taller. According to the Red Book,
Bandobras Took (Bullroarer), son of Isumbras the Third, was four
foot ﬁve and able to ride a horse. He was surpassed in all Hobbit
records only by two famous characters of old; but that curious matter
is dealt with in this book.
As for the Hobbits of the Shire, with whom these tales are con-
cerned, in the days of their peace and prosperity they were a merry
folk. They dressed in bright colours, being notably fond of yellow
and green; but they seldom wore shoes, since their feet had tough
leathery soles and were clad in a thick curling hair, much like the
hair of their heads, which was commonly brown. Thus, the only craft
little practised among them was shoe-making; but they had long and
skilful ﬁngers and could make many other useful and comely things.
Their faces were as a rule good-natured rather than beautiful, broad,
bright-eyed, red-cheeked, with mouths apt to laughter, and to eating
and drinking. And laugh they did, and eat, and drink, often and
heartily, being fond of simple jests at all times, and of six meals a
day (when they could get them). They were hospitable and delighted
in parties, and in presents, which they gave away freely and eagerly
accepted.
It is plain indeed that in spite of later estrangement Hobbits are
relatives of ours: far nearer to us than Elves, or even than Dwarves.
Of old they spoke the languages of Men, after their own fashion, and
liked and disliked much the same things as Men did. But what exactly
our relationship is can no longer be discovered. The beginning of
Hobbits lies far back in the Elder Days that are now lost and forgotten.
Only the Elves still preserve any records of that vanished time, and
their traditions are concerned almost entirely with their own history,
in which Men appear seldom and Hobbits are not mentioned at all.
Yet it is clear that Hobbits had, in fact, lived quietly in Middle-earth
for many long years before other folk became even aware of them.
And the world being after all full of strange creatures beyond count,
these little people seemed of very little importance. But in the days
of Bilbo, and of Frodo his heir, they suddenly became, by no wish
of their own, both important and renowned, and troubled the
counsels of the Wise and the Great.
Those days, the Third Age of Middle-earth, are now long past,
and the shape of all lands has been changed; but the regions in which
Hobbits then lived were doubtless the same as those in which they
still linger: the North-West of the Old World, east of the Sea. Of their
original home the Hobbits in Bilbo’s time preserved no knowledge. A
love of learning (other than genealogical lore) was far from general

among them, but there remained still a few in the older families who
studied their own books, and even gathered reports of old times and
distant lands from Elves, Dwarves, and Men. Their own records
began only after the settlement of the Shire, and their most ancient
legends hardly looked further back than their Wandering Days. It is
clear, nonetheless, from these legends, and from the evidence of their
peculiar words and customs, that like many other folk Hobbits had
in the distant past moved westward. Their earliest tales seem to
glimpse a time when they dwelt in the upper vales of Anduin, between
the eaves of Greenwood the Great and the Misty Mountains. Why
they later undertook the hard and perilous crossing of the mountains
into Eriador is no longer certain. Their own accounts speak of the
multiplying of Men in the land, and of a shadow that fell on the
forest, so that it became darkened and its new name was Mirkwood.
Before the crossing of the mountains the Hobbits had already
become divided into three somewhat different breeds: Harfoots,
Stoors, and Fallohides. The Harfoots were browner of skin, smaller,
and shorter, and they were beardless and bootless; their hands and
feet were neat and nimble; and they preferred highlands and hillsides.
The Stoors were broader, heavier in build; their feet and hands were
larger; and they preferred ﬂat lands and riversides. The Fallohides
were fairer of skin and also of hair, and they were taller and slimmer
than the others; they were lovers of trees and of woodlands.
The Harfoots had much to do with Dwarves in ancient times, and
long lived in the foothills of the mountains. They moved westward
early, and roamed over Eriador as far as Weathertop while the others
were still in Wilderland. They were the most normal and repre-
sentative variety of Hobbit, and far the most numerous. They were
the most inclined to settle in one place, and longest preserved their
ancestral habit of living in tunnels and holes.
The Stoors lingered long by the banks of the Great River Anduin,
and were less shy of Men. They came west after the Harfoots and
followed the course of the Loudwater southwards; and there many
of them long dwelt between Tharbad and the borders of Dunland
before they moved north again.
The Fallohides, the least numerous, were a northerly branch. They
were more friendly with Elves than the other Hobbits were, and had
more skill in language and song than in handicrafts; and of old they
preferred hunting to tilling. They crossed the mountains north of
Rivendell and came down the River Hoarwell. In Eriador they soon
mingled with the other kinds that had preceded them, but being
somewhat bolder and more adventurous, they were often found as
leaders or chieftains among clans of Harfoots or Stoors. Even in
Bilbo’s time the strong Fallohidish strain could still be noted among

the greater families, such as the Tooks and the Masters of Buckland.
In the westlands of Eriador, between the Misty Mountains and
the Mountains of Lune, the Hobbits found both Men and Elves.
Indeed, a remnant still dwelt there of the Du´nedain, the kings of
Men that came over the Sea out of Westernesse; but they were dwin-
dling fast and the lands of their North Kingdom were falling far and
wide into waste. There was room and to spare for incomers, and ere
long the Hobbits began to settle in ordered communities. Most of
their earlier settlements had long disappeared and been forgotten in
Bilbo’s time; but one of the ﬁrst to become important still endured,
though reduced in size; this was at Bree and in the Chetwood that
lay round about, some forty miles east of the Shire.
It was in these early days, doubtless, that the Hobbits learned their
letters and began to write after the manner of the Du´nedain, who
had in their turn long before learned the art from the Elves. And in
those days also they forgot whatever languages they had used before,
and spoke ever after the Common Speech, the Westron as it was
named, that was current through all the lands of the kings from Arnor
to Gondor, and about all the coasts of the Sea from Belfalas to Lune.
Yet they kept a few words of their own, as well as their own names
of months and days, and a great store of personal names out of
the past.
About this time legend among the Hobbits ﬁrst becomes history
with a reckoning of years. For it was in the one thousand six hundred
and ﬁrst year of the Third Age that the Fallohide brothers, Marcho
and Blanco, set out from Bree; and having obtained permission from
the high king at Fornost,* they crossed the brown river Baranduin
with a great following of Hobbits. They passed over the Bridge of
Stonebows, that had been built in the days of the power of the North
Kingdom, and they took all the land beyond to dwell in, between
the river and the Far Downs. All that was demanded of them was
that they should keep the Great Bridge in repair, and all other bridges
and roads, speed the king’s messengers, and acknowledge his
lordship.
Thus began the Shire-reckoning, for the year of the crossing of the
Brandywine (as the Hobbits turned the name) became Year One of
the Shire, and all later dates were reckoned from it.† At once the
western Hobbits fell in love with their new land, and they remained
there, and soon passed once more out of the history of Men and of
Elves. While there was still a king they were in name his subjects,
* As the records of Gondor relate this was Argeleb II, the twentieth of the Northern
line, which came to an end with Arvedui three hundred years later.
† Thus, the years of the Third Age in the reckoning of the Elves and the Du´ nedain
may be found by adding 1600 to the dates of Shire-reckoning.

but they were, in fact, ruled by their own chieftains and meddled not
at all with events in the world outside. To the last battle at Fornost
with the Witch-lord of Angmar they sent some bowmen to the aid
of the king, or so they maintained, though no tales of Men record
it. But in that war the North Kingdom ended; and then the Hobbits
took the land for their own, and they chose from their own chiefs a
Thain to hold the authority of the king that was gone. There for a
thousand years they were little troubled by wars, and they prospered
and multiplied after the Dark Plague (S.R. 37) until the disaster of
the Long Winter and the famine that followed it. Many thousands
then perished, but the Days of Dearth (1158–60) were at the time of
this tale long past and the Hobbits had again become accustomed
to plenty. The land was rich and kindly, and though it had long been
deserted when they entered it, it had before been well tilled, and
there the king had once had many farms, cornlands, vineyards, and
woods.
Forty leagues it stretched from the Far Downs to the Brandywine
Bridge, and ﬁfty from the northern moors to the marshes in the south.
The Hobbits named it the Shire, as the region of the authority of
their Thain, and a district of well-ordered business; and there in that
pleasant corner of the world they plied their well-ordered business
of living, and they heeded less and less the world outside where dark
things moved, until they came to think that peace and plenty were
the rule in Middle-earth and the right of all sensible folk. They forgot
or ignored what little they had ever known of the Guardians, and of
the labours of those that made possible the long peace of the Shire.
They were, in fact, sheltered, but they had ceased to remember it.
At no time had Hobbits of any kind been warlike, and they had
never fought among themselves. In olden days they had, of course,
been often obliged to ﬁght to maintain themselves in a hard world;
but in Bilbo’s time that was very ancient history. The last battle,
before this story opens, and indeed the only one that had ever been
fought within the borders of the Shire, was beyond living memory:
the Battle of Greenﬁelds, S.R. 1147, in which Bandobras Took routed
an invasion of Orcs. Even the weathers had grown milder, and the
wolves that had once come ravening out of the North in bitter white
winters were now only a grandfather’s tale. So, though there was
still some store of weapons in the Shire, these were used mostly as
trophies, hanging above hearths or on walls, or gathered into the
museum at Michel Delving. The Mathom-house it was called; for
anything that Hobbits had no immediate use for, but were unwilling
to throw away, they called a mathom. Their dwellings were apt to
become rather crowded with mathoms, and many of the presents
that passed from hand to hand were of that sort.

Nonetheless, ease and peace had left this people still curiously
tough. They were, if it came to it, difﬁcult to daunt or to kill; and
they were, perhaps, so unwearyingly fond of good things not least
because they could, when put to it, do without them, and could
survive rough handling by grief, foe, or weather in a way that aston-
ished those who did not know them well and looked no further than
their bellies and their well-fed faces. Though slow to quarrel, and for
sport killing nothing that lived, they were doughty at bay, and at
need could still handle arms. They shot well with the bow, for they
were keen-eyed and sure at the mark. Not only with bows and arrows.
If any Hobbit stooped for a stone, it was well to get quickly under
cover, as all trespassing beasts knew very well.
All Hobbits had originally lived in holes in the ground, or so they
believed, and in such dwellings they still felt most at home; but in
the course of time they had been obliged to adopt other forms of
abode. Actually in the Shire in Bilbo’s days it was, as a rule, only
the richest and the poorest Hobbits that maintained the old custom.
The poorest went on living in burrows of the most primitive kind,
mere holes indeed, with only one window or none; while the well-
to-do still constructed more luxurious versions of the simple diggings
of old. But suitable sites for these large and ramifying tunnels (or
smials as they called them) were not everywhere to be found; and in
the ﬂats and the low-lying districts the Hobbits, as they multiplied,
began to build above ground. Indeed, even in the hilly regions and
the older villages, such as Hobbiton or Tuckborough, or in the chief
township of the Shire, Michel Delving on the White Downs, there
were now many houses of wood, brick, or stone. These were specially
favoured by millers, smiths, ropers, and cartwrights, and others of
that sort; for even when they had holes to live in, Hobbits had long
been accustomed to build sheds and workshops.
The habit of building farmhouses and barns was said to have begun
among the inhabitants of the Marish down by the Brandywine. The
Hobbits of that quarter, the Eastfarthing, were rather large and heavy-
legged, and they wore dwarf-boots in muddy weather. But they were
well known to be Stoors in a large part of their blood, as indeed was
shown by the down that many grew on their chins. No Harfoot or
Fallohide had any trace of a beard. Indeed, the folk of the Marish,
and of Buckland, east of the River, which they afterwards occupied,
came for the most part later into the Shire up from south-away; and
they still had many peculiar names and strange words not found
elsewhere in the Shire.
It is probable that the craft of building, as many other crafts beside,
was derived from the Du´ nedain. But the Hobbits may have learned
it direct from the Elves, the teachers of Men in their youth. For the

Elves of the High Kindred had not yet forsaken Middle-earth, and
they dwelt still at that time at the Grey Havens away to the west,
and in other places within reach of the Shire. Three Elf-towers of
immemorial age were still to be seen on the Tower Hills beyond the
western marches. They shone far off in the moonlight. The tallest
was furthest away, standing alone upon a green mound. The Hobbits
of the Westfarthing said that one could see the Sea from the top of
that tower; but no Hobbit had ever been known to climb it. Indeed,
few Hobbits had ever seen or sailed upon the Sea, and fewer still had
ever returned to report it. Most Hobbits regarded even rivers and
small boats with deep misgivings, and not many of them could swim.
And as the days of the Shire lengthened they spoke less and less with
the Elves, and grew afraid of them, and distrustful of those that had
dealings with them; and the Sea became a word of fear among them,
and a token of death, and they turned their faces away from the hills
in the west.
The craft of building may have come from Elves or Men, but the
Hobbits used it in their own fashion. They did not go in for towers.
Their houses were usually long, low, and comfortable. The oldest
kind were, indeed, no more than built imitations of smials, thatched
with dry grass or straw, or roofed with turves, and having walls some-
what bulged. That stage, however, belonged to the early days of the
Shire, and hobbit-building had long since been altered, improved
by devices, learned from Dwarves, or discovered by themselves. A
preference for round windows, and even round doors, was the chief
remaining peculiarity of hobbit-architecture.
The houses and the holes of Shire-hobbits were often large,
and inhabited by large families. (Bilbo and Frodo Baggins were as
bachelors very exceptional, as they were also in many other ways,
such as their friendship with the Elves.) Sometimes, as in the case
of the Tooks of Great Smials, or the Brandybucks of Brandy Hall,
many generations of relatives lived in (comparative) peace together
in one ancestral and many-tunnelled mansion. All Hobbits were, in
any case, clannish and reckoned up their relationships with great
care. They drew long and elaborate family-trees with innumerable
branches. In dealing with Hobbits it is important to remember who
is related to whom, and in what degree. It would be impossible in this
book to set out a family-tree that included even the more important
members of the more important families at the time which these
tales tell of. The genealogical trees at the end of the Red Book of
Westmarch are a small book in themselves, and all but Hobbits would
ﬁnd them exceedingly dull. Hobbits delighted in such things, if they
were accurate: they liked to have books ﬁlled with things that they
already knew, set out fair and square with no contradictions.

2
Concerning Pipe-weed
There is another astonishing thing about Hobbits of old that must
be mentioned, an astonishing habit: they imbibed or inhaled, through
pipes of clay or wood, the smoke of the burning leaves of a herb,
which they called pipe-weed or leaf, a variety probably of Nicotiana.
A great deal of mystery surrounds the origin of this peculiar custom,
or ‘art’ as the Hobbits preferred to call it. All that could be discovered
about it in antiquity was put together by Meriadoc Brandybuck (later
Master of Buckland), and since he and the tobacco of the Southfarth-
ing play a part in the history that follows, his remarks in the introduc-
tion to his Herblore of the Shire may be quoted.
‘This,’ he says, ‘is the one art that we can certainly claim to be
our own invention. When Hobbits ﬁrst began to smoke is not known,
all the legends and family histories take it for granted; for ages folk
in the Shire smoked various herbs, some fouler, some sweeter. But
all accounts agree that Tobold Hornblower of Longbottom in the
Southfarthing ﬁrst grew the true pipe-weed in his gardens in the days
of Isengrim the Second, about the year 1070 of Shire-reckoning. The
best home-grown still comes from that district, especially the varieties
now known as Longbottom Leaf, Old Toby, and Southern Star.
‘How Old Toby came by the plant is not recorded, for to his dying
day he would not tell. He knew much about herbs, but he was no
traveller. It is said that in his youth he went often to Bree, though
he certainly never went further from the Shire than that. It is thus
quite possible that he learned of this plant in Bree, where now, at
any rate, it grows well on the south slopes of the hill. The Bree-hobbits
claim to have been the ﬁrst actual smokers of the pipe-weed. They
claim, of course, to have done everything before the people of the
Shire, whom they refer to as ‘‘colonists’’; but in this case their claim
is, I think, likely to be true. And certainly it was from Bree that the
art of smoking the genuine weed spread in the recent centuries among
Dwarves and such other folk, Rangers, Wizards, or wanderers, as still
passed to and fro through that ancient road-meeting. The home and
centre of the art is thus to be found in the old inn of Bree, The
Prancing Pony, that has been kept by the family of Butterbur from
time beyond record.
‘All the same, observations that I have made on my own many
journeys south have convinced me that the weed itself is not native
to our parts of the world, but came northward from the lower Anduin,
whither it was, I suspect, originally brought over Sea by the Men of
Westernesse. It grows abundantly in Gondor, and there is richer and
larger than in the North, where it is never found wild, and ﬂourishes

only in warm sheltered places like Longbottom. The Men of Gondor
call it sweet galenas, and esteem it only for the fragrance of its ﬂowers.
From that land it must have been carried up the Greenway during
the long centuries between the coming of Elendil and our own days.
But even the Du´nedain of Gondor allow us this credit: Hobbits ﬁrst
put it into pipes. Not even the Wizards ﬁrst thought of that before
we did. Though one Wizard that I knew took up the art long ago,
and became as skilful in it as in all other things that he put his
mind to.’
3
Of the Ordering of the Shire
The Shire was divided into four quarters, the Farthings already
referred to, North, South, East, and West; and these again each into
a number of folklands, which still bore the names of some of the old
leading families, although by the time of this history these names
were no longer found only in their proper folklands. Nearly all Tooks
still lived in the Tookland, but that was not true of many other
families, such as the Bagginses or the Bofﬁns. Outside the Farthings
were the East and West Marches: the Buckland (p. 98); and the
Westmarch added to the Shire in S.R. 1452.
The Shire at this time had hardly any ‘government’. Families for
the most part managed their own affairs. Growing food and eating
it occupied most of their time. In other matters they were, as a rule,
generous and not greedy, but contented and moderate, so that estates,
farms, workshops, and small trades tended to remain unchanged for
generations.
There remained, of course, the ancient tradition concerning the
high king at Fornost, or Norbury as they called it, away north of the
Shire. But there had been no king for nearly a thousand years, and
even the ruins of Kings’ Norbury were covered with grass. Yet the
Hobbits still said of wild folk and wicked things (such as trolls) that
they had not heard of the king. For they attributed to the king of old
all their essential laws; and usually they kept the laws of free will,
because they were The Rules (as they said), both ancient and just.
It is true that the Took family had long been pre-eminent; for the
ofﬁce of Thain had passed to them (from the Oldbucks) some cen-
turies before, and the chief Took had borne that title ever since.
The Thain was the master of the Shire-moot, and captain of the
Shire-muster and the Hobbitry-in-arms; but as muster and moot
were only held in times of emergency, which no longer occurred, the
Thainship had ceased to be more than a nominal dignity. The Took
family was still, indeed, accorded a special respect, for it remained

both numerous and exceedingly wealthy, and was liable to produce
in every generation strong characters of peculiar habits and even
adventurous temperament. The latter qualities, however, were now
rather tolerated (in the rich) than generally approved. The custom
endured, nonetheless, of referring to the head of the family as The
Took, and of adding to his name, if required, a number: such as
Isengrim the Second, for instance.
The only real ofﬁcial in the Shire at this date was the Mayor of
Michel Delving (or of the Shire), who was elected every seven years
at the Free Fair on the White Downs at the Lithe, that is at Mid-
summer. As mayor almost his only duty was to preside at banquets,
given on the Shire-holidays, which occurred at frequent intervals.
But the ofﬁces of Postmaster and First Shirriff were attached to the
mayoralty, so that he managed both the Messenger Service and the
Watch. These were the only Shire-services, and the Messengers were
the most numerous, and much the busier of the two. By no means
all Hobbits were lettered, but those who were wrote constantly to all
their friends (and a selection of their relations) who lived further off
than an afternoon’s walk.
The Shirriffs was the name that the Hobbits gave to their police,
or the nearest equivalent that they possessed. They had, of course,
no uniforms (such things being quite unknown), only a feather in
their caps; and they were in practice rather haywards than policemen,
more concerned with the strayings of beasts than of people. There
were in all the Shire only twelve of them, three in each Farthing, for
Inside Work. A rather larger body, varying at need, was employed
to ‘beat the bounds’, and to see that Outsiders of any kind, great or
small, did not make themselves a nuisance.
At the time when this story begins the Bounders, as they were
called, had been greatly increased. There were many reports and
complaints of strange persons and creatures prowling about the
borders, or over them: the ﬁrst sign that all was not quite as it should
be, and always had been except in tales and legends of long ago. Few
heeded the sign, and not even Bilbo yet had any notion of what it
portended. Sixty years had passed since he set out on his memorable
journey, and he was old even for Hobbits, who reached a hundred
as often as not; but much evidently still remained of the considerable
wealth that he had brought back. How much or how little he revealed
to no one, not even to Frodo his favourite ‘nephew’. And he still
kept secret the ring that he had found.

4
Of the Finding of the Ring
As is told in The Hobbit, there came one day to Bilbo’s door the great
Wizard, Gandalf the Grey, and thirteen dwarves with him: none
other, indeed, than Thorin Oakenshield, descendant of kings, and
his twelve companions in exile. With them he set out, to his own
lasting astonishment, on a morning of April, it being then the year
1341 Shire-reckoning, on a quest of great treasure, the dwarf-hoards
of the Kings under the Mountain, beneath Erebor in Dale, far off in
the East. The quest was successful, and the Dragon that guarded the
hoard was destroyed. Yet, though before all was won the Battle of
Five Armies was fought, and Thorin was slain, and many deeds of
renown were done, the matter would scarcely have concerned later
history, or earned more than a note in the long annals of the Third
Age, but for an ‘accident’ by the way. The party was assailed by
Orcs in a high pass of the Misty Mountains as they went towards
Wilderland; and so it happened that Bilbo was lost for a while in the
black orc-mines deep under the mountains, and there, as he groped
in vain in the dark, he put his hand on a ring, lying on the ﬂoor of
a tunnel. He put it in his pocket. It seemed then like mere luck.
Trying to ﬁnd his way out, Bilbo went on down to the roots of
the mountains, until he could go no further. At the bottom of the
tunnel lay a cold lake far from the light, and on an island of rock in the
water lived Gollum. He was a loathsome little creature: he paddled a
small boat with his large ﬂat feet, peering with pale luminous eyes
and catching blind ﬁsh with his long ﬁngers, and eating them raw.
He ate any living thing, even orc, if he could catch it and strangle it
without a struggle. He possessed a secret treasure that had come to
him long ages ago, when he still lived in the light: a ring of gold that
made its wearer invisible. It was the one thing he loved, his ‘Precious’,
and he talked to it, even when it was not with him. For he kept it
hidden safe in a hole on his island, except when he was hunting or
spying on the orcs of the mines.
Maybe he would have attacked Bilbo at once, if the ring had been
on him when they met; but it was not, and the hobbit held in his
hand an Elvish knife, which served him as a sword. So to gain time
Gollum challenged Bilbo to the Riddle-game, saying that if he asked
a riddle which Bilbo could not guess, then he would kill him and eat
him; but if Bilbo defeated him, then he would do as Bilbo wished:
he would lead him to a way out of the tunnels.
Since he was lost in the dark without hope, and could neither go
on nor back, Bilbo accepted the challenge; and they asked one another
many riddles. In the end Bilbo won the game, more by luck (as it

seemed) than by wits; for he was stumped at last for a riddle to ask,
and cried out, as his hand came upon the ring he had picked up and
forgotten: What have I got in my pocket? This Gollum failed to answer,
though he demanded three guesses.
The Authorities, it is true, differ whether this last question was a
mere ‘question’ and not a ‘riddle’ according to the strict rules of the
Game; but all agree that, after accepting it and trying to guess the
answer, Gollum was bound by his promise. And Bilbo pressed him
to keep his word; for the thought came to him that this slimy creature
might prove false, even though such promises were held sacred, and
of old all but the wickedest things feared to break them. But after
ages alone in the dark Gollum’s heart was black, and treachery was
in it. He slipped away, and returned to his island, of which Bilbo
knew nothing, not far off in the dark water. There, he thought, lay
his ring. He was hungry now, and angry, and once his ‘Precious’ was
with him he would not fear any weapon at all.
But the ring was not on the island; he had lost it, it was gone.
His screech sent a shiver down Bilbo’s back, though he did not yet
understand what had happened. But Gollum had at last leaped to a
guess, too late. What has it got in its pocketses? he cried. The light in
his eyes was like a green ﬂame as he sped back to murder the hobbit
and recover his ‘Precious’. Just in time Bilbo saw his peril, and he
ﬂed blindly up the passage away from the water; and once more he
was saved by his luck. For as he ran he put his hand in his pocket,
and the ring slipped quietly on to his ﬁnger. So it was that Gollum
passed him without seeing him, and went to guard the way out, lest
the ‘thief ’ should escape. Warily Bilbo followed him, as he went
along, cursing, and talking to himself about his ‘Precious’; from which
talk at last even Bilbo guessed the truth, and hope came to him in
the darkness: he himself had found the marvellous ring and a chance
of escape from the orcs and from Gollum.
At length they came to a halt before an unseen opening that led
to the lower gates of the mines, on the eastward side of the mountains.
There Gollum crouched at bay, smelling and listening; and Bilbo
was tempted to slay him with his sword. But pity stayed him, and
though he kept the ring, in which his only hope lay, he would not
use it to help him kill the wretched creature at a disadvantage. In the
end, gathering his courage, he leaped over Gollum in the dark, and
ﬂed away down the passage, pursued by his enemy’s cries of hate
and despair: Thief, thief ! Baggins! We hates it for ever!
Now it is a curious fact that this is not the story as Bilbo ﬁrst told
it to his companions. To them his account was that Gollum had
promised to give him a present, if he won the game; but when Gollum

went to fetch it from his island he found the treasure was gone: a
magic ring, which had been given to him long ago on his birthday.
Bilbo guessed that this was the very ring that he had found, and as
he had won the game, it was already his by right. But being in a tight
place, he said nothing about it, and made Gollum show him the way
out, as a reward instead of a present. This account Bilbo set down
in his memoirs, and he seems never to have altered it himself, not
even after the Council of Elrond. Evidently it still appeared in the
original Red Book, as it did in several of the copies and abstracts.
But many copies contain the true account (as an alternative), derived
no doubt from notes by Frodo or Samwise, both of whom learned
the truth, though they seem to have been unwilling to delete anything
actually written by the old hobbit himself.
Gandalf, however, disbelieved Bilbo’s ﬁrst story, as soon as he
heard it, and he continued to be very curious about the ring. Eventu-
ally he got the true tale out of Bilbo after much questioning, which
for a while strained their friendship; but the wizard seemed to think
the truth important. Though he did not say so to Bilbo, he also
thought it important, and disturbing, to ﬁnd that the good hobbit
had not told the truth from the ﬁrst: quite contrary to his habit. The
idea of a ‘present’ was not mere hobbitlike invention, all the same.
It was suggested to Bilbo, as he confessed, by Gollum’s talk that he
overheard; for Gollum did, in fact, call the ring his ‘birthday-present’,
many times. That also Gandalf thought strange and suspicious; but
he did not discover the truth in this point for many more years, as
will be seen in this book.
Of Bilbo’s later adventures little more need be said here. With the
help of the ring he escaped from the orc-guards at the gate and
rejoined his companions. He used the ring many times on his quest,
chieﬂy for the help of his friends; but he kept it secret from them as
long as he could. After his return to his home he never spoke of it
again to anyone, save Gandalf and Frodo; and no one else in the
Shire knew of its existence, or so he believed. Only to Frodo did he
show the account of his Journey that he was writing.
His sword, Sting, Bilbo hung over his ﬁreplace, and his coat of
marvellous mail, the gift of the Dwarves from the Dragon-hoard, he
lent to a museum, to the Michel Delving Mathom-house in fact. But
he kept in a drawer at Bag End the old cloak and hood that he had
worn on his travels; and the ring, secured by a ﬁne chain, remained
in his pocket.
He returned to his home at Bag End on June the 22nd in his
ﬁfty-second year (S.R. 1342), and nothing very notable occurred in
the Shire until Mr. Baggins began the preparations for the celebration

of his hundred-and-eleventh birthday (S.R. 1401). At this point this
History begins.
NOTE ON THE SHIRE RECORDS
At the end of the Third Age the part played by the Hobbits in the
great events that led to the inclusion of the Shire in the Reunited
Kingdom awakened among them a more widespread interest in their
own history; and many of their traditions, up to that time still mainly
oral, were collected and written down. The greater families were also
concerned with events in the Kingdom at large, and many of their
members studied its ancient histories and legends. By the end of the
ﬁrst century of the Fourth Age there were already to be found in
the Shire several libraries that contained many historical books and
records.
The largest of these collections were probably at Undertowers, at
Great Smials, and at Brandy Hall. This account of the end of the
Third Age is drawn mainly from the Red Book of Westmarch. That
most important source for the history of the War of the Ring was so
called because it was long preserved at Undertowers, the home of
the Fairbairns, Wardens of the Westmarch.* It was in origin Bilbo’s
private diary, which he took with him to Rivendell. Frodo brought
it back to the Shire, together with many loose leaves of notes, and
during S.R. 1420–1 he nearly ﬁlled its pages with his account of the
War. But annexed to it and preserved with it, probably in a single
red case, were the three large volumes, bound in red leather, that
Bilbo gave to him as a parting gift. To these four volumes there was
added in Westmarch a ﬁfth containing commentaries, genealogies,
and various other matter concerning the hobbit members of the
Fellowship.
The original Red Book has not been preserved, but many copies
were made, especially of the ﬁrst volume, for the use of the descend-
ants of the children of Master Samwise. The most important copy,
however, has a different history. It was kept at Great Smials, but it
was written in Gondor, probably at the request of the great-grandson
of Peregrin, and completed in S.R. 1592 (F.A. 172). Its southern
scribe appended this note: Findegil, King’s Writer, ﬁnished this work
in IV 172. It is an exact copy in all details of the Thain’s Book in
Minas Tirith. That book was a copy, made at the request of King
Elessar, of the Red Book of the Periannath, and was brought to him
by the Thain Peregrin when he retired to Gondor in IV 64.
The Thain’s Book was thus the ﬁrst copy made of the Red Book
* See Appendix B: annals 1451, 1462, 1482; and note at end of Appendix C.

and contained much that was later omitted or lost. In Minas Tirith
it received much annotation, and many corrections, especially of
names, words, and quotations in the Elvish languages; and there was
added to it an abbreviated version of those parts of The Tale of Aragorn
and Arwen which lie outside the account of the War. The full tale is
stated to have been written by Barahir, grandson of the Steward
Faramir, some time after the passing of the King. But the chief
importance of Findegil’s copy is that it alone contains the whole of
Bilbo’s ‘Translations from the Elvish’. These three volumes were
found to be a work of great skill and learning in which, between 1403
and 1418, he had used all the sources available to him in Rivendell,
both living and written. But since they were little used by Frodo,
being almost entirely concerned with the Elder Days, no more is said
of them here.
Since Meriadoc and Peregrin became the heads of their great
families, and at the same time kept up their connexions with Rohan
and Gondor, the libraries at Bucklebury and Tuckborough contained
much that did not appear in the Red Book. In Brandy Hall there
were many works dealing with Eriador and the history of Rohan.
Some of these were composed or begun by Meriadoc himself, though
in the Shire he was chieﬂy remembered for his Herblore of the Shire,
and for his Reckoning of Years in which he discussed the relation of
the calendars of the Shire and Bree to those of Rivendell, Gondor,
and Rohan. He also wrote a short treatise on Old Words and Names
in the Shire, showing special interest in discovering the kinship with
the language of the Rohirrim of such ‘shire-words’ as mathom and
old elements in place names.
At Great Smials the books were of less interest to Shire-folk,
though more important for larger history. None of them was written
by Peregrin, but he and his successors collected many manuscripts
written by scribes of Gondor: mainly copies or summaries of histories
or legends relating to Elendil and his heirs. Only here in the Shire
were to be found extensive materials for the history of Nu´menor and
the arising of Sauron. It was probably at Great Smials that The Tale
of Years* was put together, with the assistance of material collected
by Meriadoc. Though the dates given are often conjectural, especially
for the Second Age, they deserve attention. It is probable that Meria-
doc obtained assistance and information from Rivendell, which he
visited more than once. There, though Elrond had departed, his sons
long remained, together with some of the High-elven folk. It is said
that Celeborn went to dwell there after the departure of Galadriel;
* Represented in much reduced form in Appendix B as far as the end of the Third
Age.

but there is no record of the day when at last he sought the Grey
Havens, and with him went the last living memory of the Elder Days
in Middle-earth.

T H E  F E L L O W S H I P
O F  T H E  R I N G
BEING THE FIRST PART OF
The Lord of the Rings

.

BOOK ONE

.

Chapter 1
A  L O N G - E X P E C T E D  P A R T Y
When Mr. Bilbo Baggins of Bag End announced that he would shortly
be celebrating his eleventy-ﬁrst birthday with a party of special mag-
niﬁcence, there was much talk and excitement in Hobbiton.
Bilbo was very rich and very peculiar, and had been the wonder
of the Shire for sixty years, ever since his remarkable disappearance
and unexpected return. The riches he had brought back from his
travels had now become a local legend, and it was popularly believed,
whatever the old folk might say, that the Hill at Bag End was full of
tunnels stuffed with treasure. And if that was not enough for fame,
there was also his prolonged vigour to marvel at. Time wore on, but it
seemed to have little effect on Mr. Baggins. At ninety he was much the
same as at ﬁfty. At ninety-nine they began to call him well-preserved; but
unchanged would have been nearer the mark. There were some that
shook their heads and thought this was too much of a good thing; it
seemed unfair that anyone should possess (apparently) perpetual
youth as well as (reputedly) inexhaustible wealth.
‘It will have to be paid for,’ they said. ‘It isn’t natural, and trouble
will come of it!’
But so far trouble had not come; and as Mr. Baggins was generous
with his money, most people were willing to forgive him his oddities
and his good fortune. He remained on visiting terms with his relatives
(except, of course, the Sackville-Bagginses), and he had many de-
voted admirers among the hobbits of poor and unimportant families.
But he had no close friends, until some of his younger cousins began
to grow up.
The eldest of these, and Bilbo’s favourite, was young Frodo
Baggins. When Bilbo was ninety-nine he adopted Frodo as his heir,
and brought him to live at Bag End; and the hopes of the Sackville-
Bagginses were ﬁnally dashed. Bilbo and Frodo happened to have
the same birthday, September 22nd. ‘You had better come and live
here, Frodo my lad,’ said Bilbo one day; ‘and then we can celebrate
our birthday-parties comfortably together.’ At that time Frodo was
still in his tweens, as the hobbits called the irresponsible twenties
between childhood and coming of age at thirty-three.
Twelve more years passed. Each year the Bagginses had given
very lively combined birthday-parties at Bag End; but now it was

understood that something quite exceptional was being planned for
that autumn. Bilbo was going to be eleventy-one, 111, a rather curious
number, and a very respectable age for a hobbit (the Old Took himself
had only reached 130); and Frodo was going to be thirty-three, 33, an
important number: the date of his ‘coming of age’.
Tongues began to wag in Hobbiton and Bywater; and rumour of
the coming event travelled all over the Shire. The history and charac-
ter of Mr. Bilbo Baggins became once again the chief topic of conver-
sation; and the older folk suddenly found their reminiscences in
welcome demand.
No one had a more attentive audience than old Ham Gamgee,
commonly known as the Gaffer. He held forth at The Ivy Bush, a
small inn on the Bywater road; and he spoke with some authority,
for he had tended the garden at Bag End for forty years, and had
helped old Holman in the same job before that. Now that he was
himself growing old and stiff in the joints, the job was mainly carried
on by his youngest son, Sam Gamgee. Both father and son were on
very friendly terms with Bilbo and Frodo. They lived on the Hill
itself, in Number 3 Bagshot Row just below Bag End.
‘A very nice well-spoken gentlehobbit is Mr. Bilbo, as I’ve always
said,’ the Gaffer declared. With perfect truth: for Bilbo was very
polite to him, calling him ‘Master Hamfast’, and consulting him
constantly upon the growing of vegetables – in the matter of ‘roots’,
especially potatoes, the Gaffer was recognized as the leading authority
by all in the neighbourhood (including himself ).
‘But what about this Frodo that lives with him?’ asked Old Noakes
of Bywater. ‘Baggins is his name, but he’s more than half a Brandy-
buck, they say. It beats me why any Baggins of Hobbiton should go
looking for a wife away there in Buckland, where folks are so queer.’
‘And no wonder they’re queer,’ put in Daddy Twofoot (the
Gaffer’s next-door neighbour), ‘if they live on the wrong side of the
Brandywine River, and right agin the Old Forest. That’s a dark bad
place, if half the tales be true.’
‘You’re right, Dad!’ said the Gaffer. ‘Not that the Brandybucks
of Buckland live in the Old Forest; but they’re a queer breed, seem-
ingly. They fool about with boats on that big river – and that isn’t
natural. Small wonder that trouble came of it, I say. But be that as
it may, Mr. Frodo is as nice a young hobbit as you could wish to
meet. Very much like Mr. Bilbo, and in more than looks. After all
his father was a Baggins. A decent respectable hobbit was Mr. Drogo
Baggins; there was never much to tell of him, till he was drownded.’
‘Drownded?’ said several voices. They had heard this and other
darker rumours before, of course; but hobbits have a passion for
family history, and they were ready to hear it again.

‘Well, so they say,’ said the Gaffer. ‘You see: Mr. Drogo, he
married poor Miss Primula Brandybuck. She was our Mr. Bilbo’s
ﬁrst cousin on the mother’s side (her mother being the youngest of
the Old Took’s daughters); and Mr. Drogo was his second cousin.
So Mr. Frodo is his ﬁrst and second cousin, once removed either
way, as the saying is, if you follow me. And Mr. Drogo was staying
at Brandy Hall with his father-in-law, old Master Gorbadoc, as he
often did after his marriage (him being partial to his vittles, and old
Gorbadoc keeping a mighty generous table); and he went out boating
on the Brandywine River; and he and his wife were drownded, and
poor Mr. Frodo only a child and all.’
‘I’ve heard they went on the water after dinner in the moonlight,’
said Old Noakes; ‘and it was Drogo’s weight as sunk the boat.’
‘And I heard she pushed him in, and he pulled her in after him,’
said Sandyman, the Hobbiton miller.
‘You shouldn’t listen to all you hear, Sandyman,’ said the Gaffer,
who did not much like the miller. ‘There isn’t no call to go talking
of pushing and pulling. Boats are quite tricky enough for those that
sit still without looking further for the cause of trouble. Anyway:
there was this Mr. Frodo left an orphan and stranded, as you might
say, among those queer Bucklanders, being brought up anyhow in
Brandy Hall. A regular warren, by all accounts. Old Master Gorbadoc
never had fewer than a couple of hundred relations in the place. Mr.
Bilbo never did a kinder deed than when he brought the lad back to
live among decent folk.
‘But I reckon it was a nasty knock for those Sackville-Bagginses.
They thought they were going to get Bag End, that time when he
went off and was thought to be dead. And then he comes back and
orders them off; and he goes on living and living, and never looking
a day older, bless him! And suddenly he produces an heir, and has
all the papers made out proper. The Sackville-Bagginses won’t never
see the inside of Bag End now, or it is to be hoped not.’
‘There’s a tidy bit of money tucked away up there, I hear tell,’
said a stranger, a visitor on business from Michel Delving in the
Westfarthing. ‘All the top of your hill is full of tunnels packed with
chests of gold and silver, and jools, by what I’ve heard.’
‘Then you’ve heard more than I can speak to,’ answered the
Gaffer. ‘I know nothing about jools. Mr. Bilbo is free with his money,
and there seems no lack of it; but I know of no tunnel-making. I saw
Mr. Bilbo when he came back, a matter of sixty years ago, when I
was a lad. I’d not long come prentice to old Holman (him being my
dad’s cousin), but he had me up at Bag End helping him to keep
folks from trampling and trapessing all over the garden while the sale
was on. And in the middle of it all Mr. Bilbo comes up the Hill with

a pony and some mighty big bags and a couple of chests. I don’t
doubt they were mostly full of treasure he had picked up in foreign
parts, where there be mountains of gold, they say; but there wasn’t
enough to ﬁll tunnels. But my lad Sam will know more about that.
He’s in and out of Bag End. Crazy about stories of the old days, he
is, and he listens to all Mr. Bilbo’s tales. Mr. Bilbo has learned him
his letters – meaning no harm, mark you, and I hope no harm will
come of it.
‘Elves and Dragons! I says to him. Cabbages and potatoes are better
for me and you. Don’t go getting mixed up in the business of your betters,
or you’ll land in trouble too big for you, I says to him. And I might say
it to others,’ he added with a look at the stranger and the miller.
But the Gaffer did not convince his audience. The legend of
Bilbo’s wealth was now too ﬁrmly ﬁxed in the minds of the younger
generation of hobbits.
‘Ah, but he has likely enough been adding to what he brought at
ﬁrst,’ argued the miller, voicing common opinion. ‘He’s often away
from home. And look at the outlandish folk that visit him: dwarves
coming at night, and that old wandering conjuror, Gandalf, and all.
You can say what you like, Gaffer, but Bag End’s a queer place, and
its folk are queerer.’
‘And you can say what you like, about what you know no more
of than you do of boating, Mr. Sandyman,’ retorted the Gaffer, dislik-
ing the miller even more than usual. ‘If that’s being queer, then we
could do with a bit more queerness in these parts. There’s some not
far away that wouldn’t offer a pint of beer to a friend, if they lived
in a hole with golden walls. But they do things proper at Bag End.
Our Sam says that everyone’s going to be invited to the party, and
there’s going to be presents, mark you, presents for all – this very
month as is.’
That very month was September, and as ﬁne as you could ask. A
day or two later a rumour (probably started by the knowledgeable
Sam) was spread about that there were going to be ﬁreworks – ﬁre-
works, what is more, such as had not been seen in the Shire for nigh
on a century, not indeed since the Old Took died.
Days passed and The Day drew nearer. An odd-looking waggon
laden with odd-looking packages rolled into Hobbiton one evening
and toiled up the Hill to Bag End. The startled hobbits peered out
of lamplit doors to gape at it. It was driven by outlandish folk, singing
strange songs: dwarves with long beards and deep hoods. A few of
them remained at Bag End. At the end of the second week in Sep-
tember a cart came in through Bywater from the direction of Brandy-
wine Bridge in broad daylight. An old man was driving it all alone.

He wore a tall pointed blue hat, a long grey cloak, and a silver scarf.
He had a long white beard and bushy eyebrows that stuck out beyond
the brim of his hat. Small hobbit-children ran after the cart all through
Hobbiton and right up the hill. It had a cargo of ﬁreworks, as they
rightly guessed. At Bilbo’s front door the old man began to unload:
there were great bundles of ﬁreworks of all sorts and shapes, each
labelled with a large red G
and the elf-rune,
.
That was Gandalf ’s mark, of course, and the old man was Gandalf
the Wizard, whose fame in the Shire was due mainly to his skill with
ﬁres, smokes, and lights. His real business was far more difﬁcult and
dangerous, but the Shire-folk knew nothing about it. To them he
was just one of the ‘attractions’ at the Party. Hence the excitement
of the hobbit-children. ‘G for Grand!’ they shouted, and the old man
smiled. They knew him by sight, though he only appeared in Hobbi-
ton occasionally and never stopped long; but neither they nor any
but the oldest of their elders had seen one of his ﬁrework displays –
they now belonged to a legendary past.
When the old man, helped by Bilbo and some dwarves, had
ﬁnished unloading, Bilbo gave a few pennies away; but not a single
squib or cracker was forthcoming, to the disappointment of the
onlookers.
‘Run away now!’ said Gandalf. ‘You will get plenty when the time
comes.’ Then he disappeared inside with Bilbo, and the door was
shut. The young hobbits stared at the door in vain for a while, and
then made off, feeling that the day of the party would never come.
Inside Bag End, Bilbo and Gandalf were sitting at the open window
of a small room looking out west on to the garden. The late afternoon
was bright and peaceful. The ﬂowers glowed red and golden: snap-
dragons and sunﬂowers, and nasturtians trailing all over the turf walls
and peeping in at the round windows.
‘How bright your garden looks!’ said Gandalf.
‘Yes,’ said Bilbo. ‘I am very fond indeed of it, and of all the dear
old Shire; but I think I need a holiday.’
‘You mean to go on with your plan then?’
‘I do. I made up my mind months ago, and I haven’t changed it.’
‘Very well. It is no good saying any more. Stick to your plan –
your whole plan, mind – and I hope it will turn out for the best, for
you, and for all of us.’
‘I hope so. Anyway I mean to enjoy myself on Thursday, and have
my little joke.’
‘Who will laugh, I wonder?’ said Gandalf, shaking his head.
‘We shall see,’ said Bilbo.
*
*
*

The next day more carts rolled up the Hill, and still more carts.
There might have been some grumbling about ‘dealing locally’, but
that very week orders began to pour out of Bag End for every kind
of provision, commodity, or luxury that could be obtained in Hobbi-
ton or Bywater or anywhere in the neighbourhood. People became
enthusiastic; and they began to tick off the days on the calendar; and
they watched eagerly for the postman, hoping for invitations.
Before long the invitations began pouring out, and the Hobbiton
post-ofﬁce was blocked, and the Bywater post-ofﬁce was snowed
under, and voluntary assistant postmen were called for. There was a
constant stream of them going up the Hill, carrying hundreds of
polite variations on Thank you, I shall certainly come.
A notice appeared on the gate at Bag End: no admittance
except on party business. Even those who had, or pretended to
have Party Business were seldom allowed inside. Bilbo was busy:
writing invitations, ticking off answers, packing up presents, and
making some private preparations of his own. From the time of
Gandalf ’s arrival he remained hidden from view.
One morning the hobbits woke to ﬁnd the large ﬁeld, south of
Bilbo’s front door, covered with ropes and poles for tents and pav-
ilions. A special entrance was cut into the bank leading to the road,
and wide steps and a large white gate were built there. The three
hobbit-families of Bagshot Row, adjoining the ﬁeld, were intensely
interested and generally envied. Old Gaffer Gamgee stopped even
pretending to work in his garden.
The tents began to go up. There was a specially large pavilion, so
big that the tree that grew in the ﬁeld was right inside it, and stood
proudly near one end, at the head of the chief table. Lanterns were
hung on all its branches. More promising still (to the hobbits’ mind):
an enormous open-air kitchen was erected in the north corner of the
ﬁeld. A draught of cooks, from every inn and eating-house for miles
around, arrived to supplement the dwarves and other odd folk that
were quartered at Bag End. Excitement rose to its height.
Then the weather clouded over. That was on Wednesday the eve
of the Party. Anxiety was intense. Then Thursday, September the
22nd, actually dawned. The sun got up, the clouds vanished, ﬂags
were unfurled and the fun began.
Bilbo Baggins called it a party, but it was really a variety of enter-
tainments rolled into one. Practically everybody living near was
invited. A very few were overlooked by accident, but as they turned
up all the same, that did not matter. Many people from other parts
of the Shire were also asked; and there were even a few from outside
the borders. Bilbo met the guests (and additions) at the new white
gate in person. He gave away presents to all and sundry – the latter

were those who went out again by a back way and came in again by
the gate. Hobbits give presents to other people on their own birthdays.
Not very expensive ones, as a rule, and not so lavishly as on this
occasion; but it was not a bad system. Actually in Hobbiton and
Bywater every day in the year was somebody’s birthday, so that every
hobbit in those parts had a fair chance of at least one present at least
once a week. But they never got tired of them.
On this occasion the presents were unusually good. The hobbit-
children were so excited that for a while they almost forgot about
eating. There were toys the like of which they had never seen before,
all beautiful and some obviously magical. Many of them had indeed
been ordered a year before, and had come all the way from the
Mountain and from Dale, and were of real dwarf-make.
When every guest had been welcomed and was ﬁnally inside the
gate, there were songs, dances, music, games, and, of course, food
and drink. There were three ofﬁcial meals: lunch, tea, and dinner
(or supper). But lunch and tea were marked chieﬂy by the fact that
at those times all the guests were sitting down and eating together.
At other times there were merely lots of people eating and drinking
–continuously from elevenses until six-thirty, when the ﬁreworks
started.
The ﬁreworks were by Gandalf: they were not only brought by
him, but designed and made by him; and the special effects, set
pieces, and ﬂights of rockets were let off by him. But there was also
a generous distribution of squibs, crackers, backarappers, sparklers,
torches, dwarf-candles, elf-fountains, goblin-barkers and thunder-
claps. They were all superb. The art of Gandalf improved with age.
There were rockets like a ﬂight of scintillating birds singing with
sweet voices. There were green trees with trunks of dark smoke: their
leaves opened like a whole spring unfolding in a moment, and their
shining branches dropped glowing ﬂowers down upon the astonished
hobbits, disappearing with a sweet scent just before they touched their
upturned faces. There were fountains of butterﬂies that ﬂew glittering
into the trees; there were pillars of coloured ﬁres that rose and turned
into eagles, or sailing ships, or a phalanx of ﬂying swans; there was
a red thunderstorm and a shower of yellow rain; there was a forest
of silver spears that sprang suddenly into the air with a yell like an
embattled army, and came down again into the Water with a hiss
like a hundred hot snakes. And there was also one last surprise, in
honour of Bilbo, and it startled the hobbits exceedingly, as Gandalf
intended. The lights went out. A great smoke went up. It shaped
itself like a mountain seen in the distance, and began to glow at the
summit. It spouted green and scarlet ﬂames. Out ﬂew a red-golden
dragon – not life-size, but terribly life-like: ﬁre came from his jaws,

his eyes glared down; there was a roar, and he whizzed three times
over the heads of the crowd. They all ducked, and many fell ﬂat on
their faces. The dragon passed like an express train, turned a somer-
sault, and burst over Bywater with a deafening explosion.
‘That is the signal for supper!’ said Bilbo. The pain and alarm
vanished at once, and the prostrate hobbits leaped to their feet. There
was a splendid supper for everyone; for everyone, that is, except those
invited to the special family dinner-party. This was held in the great
pavilion with the tree. The invitations were limited to twelve dozen
(a number also called by the hobbits one Gross, though the word
was not considered proper to use of people); and the guests were
selected from all the families to which Bilbo and Frodo were related,
with the addition of a few special unrelated friends (such as Gandalf ).
Many young hobbits were included, and present by parental per-
mission; for hobbits were easy-going with their children in the matter
of sitting up late, especially when there was a chance of getting them
a free meal. Bringing up young hobbits took a lot of provender.
There were many Bagginses and Bofﬁns, and also many Tooks and
Brandybucks; there were various Grubbs (relations of Bilbo Baggins’
grandmother), and various Chubbs (connexions of his Took grand-
father); and a selection of Burrowses, Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Brock-
houses, Goodbodies, Hornblowers and Proudfoots. Some of these
were only very distantly connected with Bilbo, and some had hardly
ever been in Hobbiton before, as they lived in remote corners of the
Shire. The Sackville-Bagginses were not forgotten. Otho and his wife
Lobelia were present. They disliked Bilbo and detested Frodo, but
so magniﬁcent was the invitation card, written in golden ink, that
they had felt it was impossible to refuse. Besides, their cousin, Bilbo,
had been specializing in food for many years and his table had a high
reputation.
All the one hundred and forty-four guests expected a pleasant
feast; though they rather dreaded the after-dinner speech of their
host (an inevitable item). He was liable to drag in bits of what he
called poetry; and sometimes, after a glass or two, would allude to
the absurd adventures of his mysterious journey. The guests were
not disappointed: they had a very pleasant feast, in fact an engrossing
entertainment: rich, abundant, varied, and prolonged. The purchase
of provisions fell almost to nothing throughout the district in the
ensuing weeks; but as Bilbo’s catering had depleted the stocks of
most of the stores, cellars and warehouses for miles around, that did
not matter much.
After the feast (more or less) came the Speech. Most of the com-
pany were, however, now in a tolerant mood, at that delightful stage
which they called ‘ﬁlling up the corners’. They were sipping their

favourite drinks, and nibbling at their favourite dainties, and their
fears were forgotten. They were prepared to listen to anything, and
to cheer at every full stop.
My dear People, began Bilbo, rising in his place. ‘Hear! Hear! Hear!’
they shouted, and kept on repeating it in chorus, seeming reluctant
to follow their own advice. Bilbo left his place and went and stood
on a chair under the illuminated tree. The light of the lanterns fell
on his beaming face; the golden buttons shone on his embroidered
silk waistcoat. They could all see him standing, waving one hand in
the air, the other was in his trouser-pocket.
My dear Bagginses and Bofﬁns, he began again; and my dear Tooks
and Brandybucks, and Grubbs, and Chubbs, and Burrowses, and Horn-
blowers, and Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Goodbodies, Brockhouses and Proudfoots.
‘Proudfeet!’ shouted an elderly hobbit from the back of the pavilion.
His name, of course, was Proudfoot, and well merited; his feet were
large, exceptionally furry, and both were on the table.
Proudfoots, repeated Bilbo. Also my good Sackville-Bagginses that I
welcome back at last to Bag End. Today is my one hundred and eleventh
birthday: I am eleventy-one today! ‘Hurray! Hurray! Many Happy
Returns!’ they shouted, and they hammered joyously on the tables.
Bilbo was doing splendidly. This was the sort of stuff they liked:
short and obvious.
I hope you are all enjoying yourselves as much as I am. Deafening
cheers. Cries of Yes (and No). Noises of trumpets and horns, pipes
and ﬂutes, and other musical instruments. There were, as has been
said, many young hobbits present. Hundreds of musical crackers had
been pulled. Most of them bore the mark dale on them; which did
not convey much to most of the hobbits, but they all agreed they
were marvellous crackers. They contained instruments, small, but of
perfect make and enchanting tones. Indeed, in one corner some of
the young Tooks and Brandybucks, supposing Uncle Bilbo to have
ﬁnished (since he had plainly said all that was necessary), now got
up an impromptu orchestra, and began a merry dance-tune. Master
Everard Took and Miss Melilot Brandybuck got on a table and with
bells in their hands began to dance the Springle-ring: a pretty dance,
but rather vigorous.
But Bilbo had not ﬁnished. Seizing a horn from a youngster nearby,
he blew three loud hoots. The noise subsided. I shall not keep you
long, he cried. Cheers from all the assembly. I have called you all
together for a Purpose. Something in the way that he said this made
an impression. There was almost silence, and one or two of the Tooks
pricked up their ears.
Indeed, for Three Purposes! First of all, to tell you that I am immensely
fond of you all, and that eleventy-one years is too short a time to live

among such excellent and admirable hobbits. Tremendous outburst of
approval.
I don’t know half of you half as well as I should like; and I like less
than half of you half as well as you deserve. This was unexpected and
rather difﬁcult. There was some scattered clapping, but most of them
were trying to work it out and see if it came to a compliment.
Secondly, to celebrate my birthday. Cheers again. I should say: OUR
birthday. For it is, of course, also the birthday of my heir and nephew,
Frodo. He comes of age and into his inheritance today. Some perfunctory
clapping by the elders; and some loud shouts of ‘Frodo! Frodo! Jolly
old Frodo,’ from the juniors. The Sackville-Bagginses scowled, and
wondered what was meant by ‘coming into his inheritance’.
Together we score one hundred and forty-four. Your numbers were
chosen to ﬁt this remarkable total: One Gross, if I may use the expression.
No cheers. This was ridiculous. Many of the guests, and especially
the Sackville-Bagginses, were insulted, feeling sure they had only
been asked to ﬁll up the required number, like goods in a package.
‘One Gross, indeed! Vulgar expression.’
It is also, if I may be allowed to refer to ancient history, the anniversary
of my arrival by barrel at Esgaroth on the Long Lake; though the fact
that it was my birthday slipped my memory on that occasion. I was only
ﬁfty-one then, and birthdays did not seem so important. The banquet was
very splendid, however, though I had a bad cold at the time, I remember,
and could only say ‘thag you very buch’. I now repeat it more correctly:
Thank you very much for coming to my little party. Obstinate silence.
They all feared that a song or some poetry was now imminent; and
they were getting bored. Why couldn’t he stop talking and let them
drink his health? But Bilbo did not sing or recite. He paused for a
moment.
Thirdly and ﬁnally, he said, I wish to make an ANNOUNCEMENT.
He spoke this last word so loudly and suddenly that everyone sat up
who still could. I regret to announce that – though, as I said, eleventy-one
years is far too short a time to spend among you – this is the END. I am
going. I am leaving NOW. GOOD-BYE!
He stepped down and vanished. There was a blinding ﬂash of
light, and the guests all blinked. When they opened their eyes Bilbo
was nowhere to be seen. One hundred and forty-four ﬂabbergasted
hobbits sat back speechless. Old Odo Proudfoot removed his feet
from the table and stamped. Then there was a dead silence, until
suddenly, after several deep breaths, every Baggins, Bofﬁn, Took,
Brandybuck, Grubb, Chubb, Burrows, Bolger, Bracegirdle, Brock-
house, Goodbody, Hornblower, and Proudfoot began to talk at once.
It was generally agreed that the joke was in very bad taste, and more

food and drink were needed to cure the guests of shock and annoyance.
‘He’s mad. I always said so,’ was probably the most popular comment.
Even the Tooks (with a few exceptions) thought Bilbo’s behaviour
was absurd. For the moment most of them took it for granted that
his disappearance was nothing more than a ridiculous prank.
But old Rory Brandybuck was not so sure. Neither age nor an
enormous dinner had clouded his wits, and he said to his daughter-in-
law, Esmeralda: ‘There’s something ﬁshy in this, my dear! I believe
that mad Baggins is off again. Silly old fool. But why worry? He
hasn’t taken the vittles with him.’ He called loudly to Frodo to send
the wine round again.
Frodo was the only one present who had said nothing. For some
time he had sat silent beside Bilbo’s empty chair, and ignored all
remarks and questions. He had enjoyed the joke, of course, even
though he had been in the know. He had difﬁculty in keeping from
laughter at the indignant surprise of the guests. But at the same
time he felt deeply troubled: he realized suddenly that he loved the
old hobbit dearly. Most of the guests went on eating and drinking
and discussing Bilbo Baggins’ oddities, past and present; but the
Sackville-Bagginses had already departed in wrath. Frodo did not
want to have any more to do with the party. He gave orders for more
wine to be served; then he got up and drained his own glass silently
to the health of Bilbo, and slipped out of the pavilion.
As for Bilbo Baggins, even while he was making his speech, he
had been ﬁngering the golden ring in his pocket: his magic ring that
he had kept secret for so many years. As he stepped down he slipped
it on his ﬁnger, and he was never seen by any hobbit in Hobbiton
again.
He walked briskly back to his hole, and stood for a moment listen-
ing with a smile to the din in the pavilion, and to the sounds of
merrymaking in other parts of the ﬁeld. Then he went in. He took
off his party clothes, folded up and wrapped in tissue-paper his
embroidered silk waistcoat, and put it away. Then he put on quickly
some old untidy garments, and fastened round his waist a worn
leather belt. On it he hung a short sword in a battered black-leather
scabbard. From a locked drawer, smelling of moth-balls, he took out
an old cloak and hood. They had been locked up as if they were very
precious, but they were so patched and weatherstained that their
original colour could hardly be guessed: it might have been dark
green. They were rather too large for him. He then went into his
study, and from a large strong-box took out a bundle wrapped in
old cloths, and a leather-bound manuscript; and also a large bulky
envelope. The book and bundle he stuffed into the top of a heavy

bag that was standing there, already nearly full. Into the envelope he
slipped his golden ring, and its ﬁne chain, and then sealed it, and
addressed it to Frodo. At ﬁrst he put it on the mantelpiece, but
suddenly he removed it and stuck it in his pocket. At that moment
the door opened and Gandalf came quickly in.
‘Hullo!’ said Bilbo. ‘I wondered if you would turn up.’
‘I am glad to ﬁnd you visible,’ replied the wizard, sitting down in a
chair, ‘I wanted to catch you and have a few ﬁnal words. I suppose you
feel that everything has gone off splendidly and according to plan?’
‘Yes, I do,’ said Bilbo. ‘Though that ﬂash was surprising: it quite
startled me, let alone the others. A little addition of your own, I
suppose?’
‘It was. You have wisely kept that ring secret all these years, and
it seemed to me necessary to give your guests something else that
would seem to explain your sudden vanishment.’
‘And would spoil my joke. You are an interfering old busybody,’
laughed Bilbo, ‘but I expect you know best, as usual.’
‘I do – when I know anything. But I don’t feel too sure about this
whole affair. It has now come to the ﬁnal point. You have had your
joke, and alarmed or offended most of your relations, and given the
whole Shire something to talk about for nine days, or ninety-nine
more likely. Are you going any further?’
‘Yes, I am. I feel I need a holiday, a very long holiday, as I have
told you before. Probably a permanent holiday: I don’t expect I shall
return. In fact, I don’t mean to, and I have made all arrangements.
‘I am old, Gandalf. I don’t look it, but I am beginning to feel it
in my heart of hearts. Well-preserved indeed!’ he snorted. ‘Why, I feel
all thin, sort of stretched, if you know what I mean: like butter that
has been scraped over too much bread. That can’t be right. I need
a change, or something.’
Gandalf looked curiously and closely at him. ‘No, it does not
seem right,’ he said thoughtfully. ‘No, after all I believe your plan is
probably the best.’
‘Well, I’ve made up my mind, anyway. I want to see mountains
again, Gandalf – mountains; and then ﬁnd somewhere where I can
rest. In peace and quiet, without a lot of relatives prying around, and
a string of confounded visitors hanging on the bell. I might ﬁnd
somewhere where I can ﬁnish my book. I have thought of a nice
ending for it: and he lived happily ever after to the end of his days.’
Gandalf laughed. ‘I hope he will. But nobody will read the book,
however it ends.’
‘Oh, they may, in years to come. Frodo has read some already, as
far as it has gone. You’ll keep an eye on Frodo, won’t you?’
‘Yes, I will – two eyes, as often as I can spare them.’

‘He would come with me, of course, if I asked him. In fact he
offered to once, just before the party. But he does not really want
to, yet. I want to see the wild country again before I die, and the
Mountains; but he is still in love with the Shire, with woods and
ﬁelds and little rivers. He ought to be comfortable here. I am leaving
everything to him, of course, except a few oddments. I hope he will
be happy, when he gets used to being on his own. It’s time he was
his own master now.’
‘Everything?’ said Gandalf. ‘The ring as well? You agreed to that,
you remember.’
‘Well, er, yes, I suppose so,’ stammered Bilbo.
‘Where is it?’
‘In an envelope, if you must know,’ said Bilbo impatiently. ‘There
on the mantelpiece. Well, no! Here it is in my pocket!’ He hesitated.
‘Isn’t that odd now?’ he said softly to himself. ‘Yet after all, why not?
Why shouldn’t it stay there?’
Gandalf looked again very hard at Bilbo, and there was a gleam
in his eyes.‘I think, Bilbo,’ he said quietly, ‘I should leave it behind.
Don’t you want to?’
‘Well yes – and no. Now it comes to it, I don’t like parting with
it at all, I may say. And I don’t really see why I should. Why do you
want me to?’ he asked, and a curious change came over his voice. It
was sharp with suspicion and annoyance. ‘You are always badgering
me about my ring; but you have never bothered me about the other
things that I got on my journey.’
‘No, but I had to badger you,’ said Gandalf. ‘I wanted the truth.
It was important. Magic rings are – well, magical; and they are rare
and curious. I was professionally interested in your ring, you may
say; and I still am. I should like to know where it is, if you go
wandering again. Also I think you have had it quite long enough.
You won’t need it any more, Bilbo, unless I am quite mistaken.’
Bilbo ﬂushed, and there was an angry light in his eyes. His kindly
face grew hard. ‘Why not?’ he cried. ‘And what business is it of yours,
anyway, to know what I do with my own things? It is my own. I
found it. It came to me.’
‘Yes, yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is no need to get angry.’
‘If I am it is your fault,’ said Bilbo. ‘It is mine, I tell you. My own.
My Precious. Yes, my Precious.’
The wizard’s face remained grave and attentive, and only a ﬂicker
in his deep eyes showed that he was startled and indeed alarmed. ‘It
has been called that before,’ he said, ‘but not by you.’
‘But I say it now. And why not? Even if Gollum said the same
once. It’s not his now, but mine. And I shall keep it, I say.’
Gandalf stood up. He spoke sternly. ‘You will be a fool if you do,

Bilbo,’ he said. ‘You make that clearer with every word you say. It
has got far too much hold on you. Let it go! And then you can go
yourself, and be free.’
‘I’ll do as I choose and go as I please,’ said Bilbo obstinately.
‘Now, now, my dear hobbit!’ said Gandalf. ‘All your long life we
have been friends, and you owe me something. Come! Do as you
promised: give it up!’
‘Well, if you want my ring yourself, say so!’ cried Bilbo. ‘But you
won’t get it. I won’t give my Precious away, I tell you.’ His hand
strayed to the hilt of his small sword.
Gandalf ’s eyes ﬂashed. ‘It will be my turn to get angry soon,’ he
said. ‘If you say that again, I shall. Then you will see Gandalf the
Grey uncloaked.’ He took a step towards the hobbit, and he seemed
to grow tall and menacing; his shadow ﬁlled the little room.
Bilbo backed away to the wall, breathing hard, his hand clutching
at his pocket. They stood for a while facing one another, and the air
of the room tingled. Gandalf ’s eyes remained bent on the hobbit.
Slowly his hands relaxed, and he began to tremble.
‘I don’t know what has come over you, Gandalf,’ he said. ‘You
have never been like this before. What is it all about? It is mine isn’t
it? I found it, and Gollum would have killed me, if I hadn’t kept it.
I’m not a thief, whatever he said.’
‘I have never called you one,’ Gandalf answered. ‘And I am not one
either. I am not trying to rob you, but to help you. I wish you would
trust me, as you used.’ He turned away, and the shadow passed. He
seemed to dwindle again to an old grey man, bent and troubled.
Bilbo drew his hand over his eyes. ‘I am sorry,’ he said. ‘But I felt
so queer. And yet it would be a relief in a way not to be bothered with
it any more. It has been so growing on my mind lately. Sometimes I
have felt it was like an eye looking at me. And I am always wanting
to put it on and disappear, don’t you know; or wondering if it is safe,
and pulling it out to make sure. I tried locking it up, but I found I
couldn’t rest without it in my pocket. I don’t know why. And I don’t
seem able to make up my mind.’
‘Then trust mine,’ said Gandalf. ‘It is quite made up. Go away
and leave it behind. Stop possessing it. Give it to Frodo, and I will
look after him.’
Bilbo stood for a moment tense and undecided. Presently he
sighed. ‘All right,’ he said with an effort. ‘I will.’ Then he shrugged
his shoulders, and smiled rather ruefully. ‘After all that’s what this
party business was all about, really: to give away lots of birthday-
presents, and somehow make it easier to give it away at the same
time. It hasn’t made it any easier in the end, but it would be a pity
to waste all my preparations. It would quite spoil the joke.’

‘Indeed it would take away the only point I ever saw in the affair,’
said Gandalf.
‘Very well,’ said Bilbo, ‘it goes to Frodo with all the rest.’ He drew
a deep breath. ‘And now I really must be starting, or somebody else
will catch me. I have said good-bye, and I couldn’t bear to do it all
over again.’ He picked up his bag and moved to the door.
‘You have still got the ring in your pocket,’ said the wizard.
‘Well, so I have!’ cried Bilbo. ‘And my will and all the other
documents too. You had better take it and deliver it for me. That
will be safest.’
‘No, don’t give the ring to me,’ said Gandalf. ‘Put it on the mantel-
piece. It will be safe enough there, till Frodo comes. I shall wait for him.’
Bilbo took out the envelope, but just as he was about to set it by
the clock, his hand jerked back, and the packet fell on the ﬂoor.
Before he could pick it up, the wizard stooped and seized it and set
it in its place. A spasm of anger passed swiftly over the hobbit’s face
again. Suddenly it gave way to a look of relief and a laugh.
‘Well, that’s that,’ he said. ‘Now I’m off !’
They went out into the hall. Bilbo chose his favourite stick from
the stand; then he whistled. Three dwarves came out of different
rooms where they had been busy.
‘Is everything ready?’ asked Bilbo. ‘Everything packed and labelled?’
‘Everything,’ they answered.
‘Well, let’s start then!’ He stepped out of the front-door.
It was a ﬁne night, and the black sky was dotted with stars. He
looked up, snifﬁng the air. ‘What fun! What fun to be off again, off
on the Road with dwarves! This is what I have really been longing
for, for years! Good-bye!’ he said, looking at his old home and bowing
to the door. ‘Good-bye, Gandalf !’
‘Good-bye, for the present, Bilbo. Take care of yourself ! You are
old enough, and perhaps wise enough.’
‘Take care! I don’t care. Don’t you worry about me! I am as happy
now as I have ever been, and that is saying a great deal. But the time
has come. I am being swept off my feet at last,’ he added, and then
in a low voice, as if to himself, he sang softly in the dark:
The Road goes ever on and on
Down from the door where it began.
Now far ahead the Road has gone,
And I must follow, if I can,
Pursuing it with eager feet,
Until it joins some larger way
Where many paths and errands meet.
And whither then? I cannot say.

He paused, silent for a moment. Then without another word he
turned away from the lights and voices in the ﬁeld and tents, and
followed by his three companions went round into his garden, and
trotted down the long sloping path. He jumped over a low place in
the hedge at the bottom, and took to the meadows, passing into the
night like a rustle of wind in the grass.
Gandalf remained for a while staring after him into the darkness.
‘Good-bye, my dear Bilbo – until our next meeting!’ he said softly
and went back indoors.
Frodo came in soon afterwards, and found him sitting in the dark,
deep in thought. ‘Has he gone?’ he asked.
‘Yes,’ answered Gandalf, ‘he has gone at last.’
‘I wish – I mean, I hoped until this evening that it was only a
joke,’ said Frodo. ‘But I knew in my heart that he really meant to
go. He always used to joke about serious things. I wish I had come
back sooner, just to see him off.’
‘I think really he preferred slipping off quietly in the end,’ said
Gandalf. ‘Don’t be too troubled. He’ll be all right – now. He left a
packet for you. There it is!’
Frodo took the envelope from the mantelpiece, and glanced at it,
but did not open it.
‘You’ll ﬁnd his will and all the other documents in there, I think,’
said the wizard. ‘You are the master of Bag End now. And also, I
fancy, you’ll ﬁnd a golden ring.’
‘The ring!’ exclaimed Frodo. ‘Has he left me that? I wonder why.
Still, it may be useful.’
‘It may, and it may not,’ said Gandalf. ‘I should not make use of
it, if I were you. But keep it secret, and keep it safe! Now I am going
to bed.’
As master of Bag End Frodo felt it his painful duty to say good-bye
to the guests. Rumours of strange events had by now spread all over
the ﬁeld, but Frodo would only say no doubt everything will be cleared
up in the morning. About midnight carriages came for the important
folk. One by one they rolled away, ﬁlled with full but very unsatisﬁed
hobbits. Gardeners came by arrangement, and removed in wheel-
barrows those that had inadvertently remained behind.
Night slowly passed. The sun rose. The hobbits rose rather later.
Morning went on. People came and began (by orders) to clear away
the pavilions and the tables and the chairs, and the spoons and knives
and bottles and plates, and the lanterns, and the ﬂowering shrubs in
boxes, and the crumbs and cracker-paper, the forgotten bags and
gloves and handkerchiefs, and the uneaten food (a very small item).

Then a number of other people came (without orders): Bagginses,
and Bofﬁns, and Bolgers, and Tooks, and other guests that lived or
were staying near. By mid-day, when even the best-fed were out and
about again, there was a large crowd at Bag End, uninvited but not
unexpected.
Frodo was waiting on the step, smiling, but looking rather tired
and worried. He welcomed all the callers, but he had not much more
to say than before. His reply to all inquiries was simply this: ‘Mr.
Bilbo Baggins has gone away; as far as I know, for good.’ Some of
the visitors he invited to come inside, as Bilbo had left ‘messages’
for them.
Inside in the hall there was piled a large assortment of packages
and parcels and small articles of furniture. On every item there was
a label tied. There were several labels of this sort:
For ADELARD TOOK, for his VERY OWN, from Bilbo; on an
umbrella. Adelard had carried off many unlabelled ones.
For DORA BAGGINS in memory of a LONG correspondence, with
love from Bilbo; on a large waste-paper basket. Dora was Drogo’s
sister and the eldest surviving female relative of Bilbo and Frodo; she
was ninety-nine, and had written reams of good advice for more than
half a century.
For MILO BURROWS, hoping it will be useful, from B.B.; on a
gold pen and ink-bottle. Milo never answered letters.
For ANGELICA’S use, from Uncle Bilbo; on a round convex mirror.
She was a young Baggins, and too obviously considered her face
shapely.
For the collection of HUGO BRACEGIRDLE, from a contributor; on
an (empty) book-case. Hugo was a great borrower of books, and
worse than usual at returning them.
For LOBELIA SACKVILLE-BAGGINS, as a PRESENT; on a
case of silver spoons. Bilbo believed that she had acquired a good
many of his spoons, while he was away on his former journey. Lobelia
knew that quite well. When she arrived later in the day, she took the
point at once, but she also took the spoons.
This is only a small selection of the assembled presents. Bilbo’s
residence had got rather cluttered up with things in the course of his
long life. It was a tendency of hobbit-holes to get cluttered up: for
which the custom of giving so many birthday-presents was largely
responsible. Not, of course, that the birthday-presents were always
new; there were one or two old mathoms of forgotten uses that had
circulated all around the district; but Bilbo had usually given new
presents, and kept those that he received. The old hole was now
being cleared a little.

Every one of the various parting gifts had labels, written out per-
sonally by Bilbo, and several had some point, or some joke. But, of
course, most of the things were given where they would be wanted
and welcome. The poorer hobbits, and especially those of Bagshot
Row, did very well. Old Gaffer Gamgee got two sacks of potatoes,
a new spade, a woollen waistcoat, and a bottle of ointment for creak-
ing joints. Old Rory Brandybuck, in return for much hospitality,
got a dozen bottles of Old Winyards: a strong red wine from the
Southfarthing, and now quite mature, as it had been laid down by
Bilbo’s father. Rory quite forgave Bilbo, and voted him a capital
fellow after the ﬁrst bottle.
There was plenty of everything left for Frodo. And, of course, all
the chief treasures, as well as the books, pictures, and more than
enough furniture, were left in his possession. There was, however,
no sign nor mention of money or jewellery: not a penny-piece or a
glass bead was given away.
Frodo had a very trying time that afternoon. A false rumour that
the whole household was being distributed free spread like wildﬁre;
and before long the place was packed with people who had no
business there, but could not be kept out. Labels got torn off and
mixed, and quarrels broke out. Some people tried to do swaps and
deals in the hall; and others tried to make off with minor items
not addressed to them, or with anything that seemed unwanted or
unwatched. The road to the gate was blocked with barrows and
handcarts.
In the middle of the commotion the Sackville-Bagginses arrived.
Frodo had retired for a while and left his friend Merry Brandybuck
to keep an eye on things. When Otho loudly demanded to see Frodo,
Merry bowed politely.
‘He is indisposed,’ he said. ‘He is resting.’
‘Hiding, you mean,’ said Lobelia. ‘Anyway we want to see him
and we mean to see him. Just go and tell him so!’
Merry left them a long while in the hall, and they had time to
discover their parting gift of spoons. It did not improve their tempers.
Eventually they were shown into the study. Frodo was sitting at a
table with a lot of papers in front of him. He looked indisposed – to
see Sackville-Bagginses at any rate; and he stood up, ﬁdgeting with
something in his pocket. But he spoke quite politely.
The Sackville-Bagginses were rather offensive. They began by
offering him bad bargain-prices (as between friends) for various valu-
able and unlabelled things. When Frodo replied that only the things
specially directed by Bilbo were being given away, they said the whole
affair was very ﬁshy.

‘Only one thing is clear to me,’ said Otho, ‘and that is that you
are doing exceedingly well out of it. I insist on seeing the will.’
Otho would have been Bilbo’s heir, but for the adoption of
Frodo. He read the will carefully and snorted. It was, unfortunately,
very clear and correct (according to the legal customs of hobbits,
which demand among other things seven signatures of witnesses in
red ink).
‘Foiled again!’ he said to his wife. ‘And after waiting sixty years.
Spoons? Fiddlesticks!’ He snapped his ﬁngers under Frodo’s nose
and stumped off. But Lobelia was not so easily got rid of. A little
later Frodo came out of the study to see how things were going on,
and found her still about the place, investigating nooks and corners,
and tapping the ﬂoors. He escorted her ﬁrmly off the premises, after
he had relieved her of several small (but rather valuable) articles that
had somehow fallen inside her umbrella. Her face looked as if she
was in the throes of thinking out a really crushing parting remark;
but all she found to say, turning round on the step, was:
‘You’ll live to regret it, young fellow! Why didn’t you go too? You
don’t belong here; you’re no Baggins – you – you’re a Brandybuck!’
‘Did you hear that, Merry? That was an insult, if you like,’ said
Frodo as he shut the door on her.
‘It was a compliment,’ said Merry Brandybuck, ‘and so, of course,
not true.’
Then they went round the hole, and evicted three young hobbits
(two Bofﬁns and a Bolger) who were knocking holes in the walls of
one of the cellars. Frodo also had a tussle with young Sancho
Proudfoot (old Odo Proudfoot’s grandson), who had begun an exca-
vation in the larger pantry, where he thought there was an echo. The
legend of Bilbo’s gold excited both curiosity and hope; for legendary
gold (mysteriously obtained, if not positively ill-gotten), is, as every-
one knows, anyone’s for the ﬁnding – unless the search is interrupted.
When he had overcome Sancho and pushed him out, Frodo col-
lapsed on a chair in the hall. ‘It’s time to close the shop, Merry,’ he
said. ‘Lock the door, and don’t open it to anyone today, not even if
they bring a battering ram.’ Then he went to revive himself with a
belated cup of tea.
He had hardly sat down, when there came a soft knock at the
front-door. ‘Lobelia again most likely,’ he thought. ‘She must have
thought of something really nasty, and have come back again to say
it. It can wait.’
He went on with his tea. The knock was repeated, much louder,
but he took no notice. Suddenly the wizard’s head appeared at the
window.

‘If you don’t let me in, Frodo, I shall blow your door right down
your hole and out through the hill,’ he said.
‘My dear Gandalf ! Half a minute!’ cried Frodo, running out of
the room to the door. ‘Come in! Come in! I thought it was Lobelia.’
‘Then I forgive you. But I saw her some time ago, driving a pony-
trap towards Bywater with a face that would have curdled new milk.’
‘She had already nearly curdled me. Honestly, I nearly tried on
Bilbo’s ring. I longed to disappear.’
‘Don’t do that!’ said Gandalf, sitting down. ‘Do be careful of that
ring, Frodo! In fact, it is partly about that that I have come to say a
last word.’
‘Well, what about it?’
‘What do you know already?’
‘Only what Bilbo told me. I have heard his story: how he found
it, and how he used it: on his journey, I mean.’
‘Which story, I wonder,’ said Gandalf.
‘Oh, not what he told the dwarves and put in his book,’ said Frodo.
‘He told me the true story soon after I came to live here. He said
you had pestered him till he told you, so I had better know too. ‘‘No
secrets between us, Frodo,’’ he said; ‘‘but they are not to go any
further. It’s mine anyway.’’ ’
‘That’s interesting,’ said Gandalf. ‘Well, what did you think of it
all?’
‘If you mean, inventing all that about a ‘‘present’’, well, I thought
the true story much more likely, and I couldn’t see the point of
altering it at all. It was very unlike Bilbo to do so, anyway; and I
thought it rather odd.’
‘So did I. But odd things may happen to people that have such
treasures – if they use them. Let it be a warning to you to be very
careful with it. It may have other powers than just making you vanish
when you wish to.’
‘I don’t understand,’ said Frodo.
‘Neither do I,’ answered the wizard. ‘I have merely begun to
wonder about the ring, especially since last night. No need to worry.
But if you take my advice you will use it very seldom, or not at all.
At least I beg you not to use it in any way that will cause talk or
rouse suspicion. I say again: keep it safe, and keep it secret!’
‘You are very mysterious! What are you afraid of ?’
‘I am not certain, so I will say no more. I may be able to tell you
something when I come back. I am going off at once: so this is
good-bye for the present.’ He got up.
‘At once!’ cried Frodo. ‘Why, I thought you were staying on for
at least a week. I was looking forward to your help.’
‘I did mean to – but I have had to change my mind. I may be

away for a good while; but I’ll come and see you again, as soon as I
can. Expect me when you see me! I shall slip in quietly. I shan’t often
be visiting the Shire openly again. I ﬁnd that I have become rather
unpopular. They say I am a nuisance and a disturber of the peace.
Some people are actually accusing me of spiriting Bilbo away, or
worse. If you want to know, there is supposed to be a plot between
you and me to get hold of his wealth.’
‘Some people!’ exclaimed Frodo. ‘You mean Otho and Lobelia.
How abominable! I would give them Bag End and everything else,
if I could get Bilbo back and go off tramping in the country with
him. I love the Shire. But I begin to wish, somehow, that I had gone
too. I wonder if I shall ever see him again.’
‘So do I,’ said Gandalf. ‘And I wonder many other things. Good-
bye now! Take care of yourself ! Look out for me, especially at unlikely
times! Good-bye!’
Frodo saw him to the door. He gave a ﬁnal wave of his hand, and
walked off at a surprising pace; but Frodo thought the old wizard
looked unusually bent, almost as if he was carrying a great weight.
The evening was closing in, and his cloaked ﬁgure quickly vanished
into the twilight. Frodo did not see him again for a long time.

Chapter 2
T H E  S H A D O W  O F  T H E  P A S T
The talk did not die down in nine or even ninety-nine days. The
second disappearance of Mr. Bilbo Baggins was discussed in Hobbi-
ton, and indeed all over the Shire, for a year and a day, and was
remembered much longer than that. It became a ﬁreside-story for
young hobbits; and eventually Mad Baggins, who used to vanish with
a bang and a ﬂash and reappear with bags of jewels and gold, became
a favourite character of legend and lived on long after all the true
events were forgotten.
But in the meantime, the general opinion in the neighbourhood
was that Bilbo, who had always been rather cracked, had at last gone
quite mad, and had run off into the Blue. There he had undoubtedly
fallen into a pool or a river and come to a tragic, but hardly an
untimely, end. The blame was mostly laid on Gandalf.
‘If only that dratted wizard will leave young Frodo alone, perhaps
he’ll settle down and grow some hobbit-sense,’ they said. And to all
appearance the wizard did leave Frodo alone, and he did settle down,
but the growth of hobbit-sense was not very noticeable. Indeed, he
at once began to carry on Bilbo’s reputation for oddity. He refused
to go into mourning; and the next year he gave a party in honour of
Bilbo’s hundred-and-twelfth birthday, which he called a Hundred-
weight Feast. But that was short of the mark, for twenty guests were
invited and there were several meals at which it snowed food and
rained drink, as hobbits say.
Some people were rather shocked; but Frodo kept up the custom
of giving Bilbo’s Birthday Party year after year until they got used to
it. He said that he did not think Bilbo was dead. When they asked:
‘Where is he then?’ he shrugged his shoulders.
He lived alone, as Bilbo had done; but he had a good many
friends, especially among the younger hobbits (mostly descen-
dants of the Old Took) who had as children been fond of Bilbo and
often in and out of Bag End. Folco Bofﬁn and Fredegar Bolger
were two of these; but his closest friends were Peregrin Took
(usually called Pippin), and Merry Brandybuck (his real name was
Meriadoc, but that was seldom remembered). Frodo went tramping
over the Shire with them; but more often he wandered by himself,
and to the amazement of sensible folk he was sometimes seen far
from home walking in the hills and woods under the starlight. Merry

and Pippin suspected that he visited the Elves at times, as Bilbo had
done.
As time went on, people began to notice that Frodo also showed
signs of good ‘preservation’: outwardly he retained the appearance
of a robust and energetic hobbit just out of his tweens. ‘Some folk
have all the luck,’ they said; but it was not until Frodo approached
the usually more sober age of ﬁfty that they began to think it queer.
Frodo himself, after the ﬁrst shock, found that being his own
master and the Mr. Baggins of Bag End was rather pleasant. For
some years he was quite happy and did not worry much about the
future. But half unknown to himself the regret that he had not gone
with Bilbo was steadily growing. He found himself wondering at
times, especially in the autumn, about the wild lands, and strange
visions of mountains that he had never seen came into his dreams.
He began to say to himself: ‘Perhaps I shall cross the River myself one
day.’ To which the other half of his mind always replied: ‘Not yet.’
So it went on, until his forties were running out, and his ﬁftieth
birthday was drawing near: ﬁfty was a number that he felt was some-
how signiﬁcant (or ominous); it was at any rate at that age that
adventure had suddenly befallen Bilbo. Frodo began to feel restless,
and the old paths seemed too well-trodden. He looked at maps, and
wondered what lay beyond their edges: maps made in the Shire
showed mostly white spaces beyond its borders. He took to wandering
further aﬁeld and more often by himself; and Merry and his other
friends watched him anxiously. Often he was seen walking and talking
with the strange wayfarers that began at this time to appear in the
Shire.
There were rumours of strange things happening in the world
outside; and as Gandalf had not at that time appeared or sent any
message for several years, Frodo gathered all the news he could.
Elves, who seldom walked in the Shire, could now be seen passing
westward through the woods in the evening, passing and not
returning; but they were leaving Middle-earth and were no longer
concerned with its troubles. There were, however, dwarves on the
road in unusual numbers. The ancient East–West Road ran through
the Shire to its end at the Grey Havens, and dwarves had always
used it on their way to their mines in the Blue Mountains. They were
the hobbits’ chief source of news from distant parts – if they wanted
any: as a rule dwarves said little and hobbits asked no more. But now
Frodo often met strange dwarves of far countries, seeking refuge in
the West. They were troubled, and some spoke in whispers of the
Enemy and of the Land of Mordor.

That name the hobbits only knew in legends of the dark past, like
a shadow in the background of their memories; but it was ominous
and disquieting. It seemed that the evil power in Mirkwood had been
driven out by the White Council only to reappear in greater strength
in the old strongholds of Mordor. The Dark Tower had been rebuilt,
it was said. From there the power was spreading far and wide, and
away far east and south there were wars and growing fear. Orcs were
multiplying again in the mountains. Trolls were abroad, no longer
dull-witted, but cunning and armed with dreadful weapons. And
there were murmured hints of creatures more terrible than all these,
but they had no name.
Little of all this, of course, reached the ears of ordinary hobbits.
But even the deafest and most stay-at-home began to hear queer
tales; and those whose business took them to the borders saw strange
things. The conversation in The Green Dragon at Bywater, one evening
in the spring of Frodo’s ﬁftieth year, showed that even in the comfort-
able heart of the Shire rumours had been heard, though most hobbits
still laughed at them.
Sam Gamgee was sitting in one corner near the ﬁre, and opposite
him was Ted Sandyman, the miller’s son; and there were various
other rustic hobbits listening to their talk.
‘Queer things you do hear these days, to be sure,’ said Sam.
‘Ah,’ said Ted, ‘you do, if you listen. But I can hear ﬁreside-tales
and children’s stories at home, if I want to.’
‘No doubt you can,’ retorted Sam, ‘and I daresay there’s more
truth in some of them than you reckon. Who invented the stories
anyway? Take dragons now.’
‘No thank ’ee,’ said Ted, ‘I won’t. I heard tell of them when I was a
youngster, but there’s no call to believe in them now. There’s only one
Dragon in Bywater, and that’s Green,’ he said, getting a general laugh.
‘All right,’ said Sam, laughing with the rest. ‘But what about these
Tree-men, these giants, as you might call them? They do say that
one bigger than a tree was seen up away beyond the North Moors
not long back.’
‘Who’s they?’
‘My cousin Hal for one. He works for Mr. Bofﬁn at Overhill and
goes up to the Northfarthing for the hunting. He saw one.’
‘Says he did, perhaps. Your Hal’s always saying he’s seen things;
and maybe he sees things that ain’t there.’
‘But this one was as big as an elm tree, and walking – walking
seven yards to a stride, if it was an inch.’
‘Then I bet it wasn’t an inch. What he saw was an elm tree, as
like as not.’

‘But this one was walking, I tell you; and there ain’t no elm tree
on the North Moors.’
‘Then Hal can’t have seen one,’ said Ted. There was some laugh-
ing and clapping: the audience seemed to think that Ted had scored
a point.
‘All the same,’ said Sam, ‘you can’t deny that others besides our
Halfast have seen queer folk crossing the Shire – crossing it, mind
you: there are more that are turned back at the borders. The Bounders
have never been so busy before.
‘And I’ve heard tell that Elves are moving west. They do say they
are going to the harbours, out away beyond the White Towers.’ Sam
waved his arm vaguely: neither he nor any of them knew how far it
was to the Sea, past the old towers beyond the western borders of
the Shire. But it was an old tradition that away over there stood the
Grey Havens, from which at times elven-ships set sail, never to return.
‘They are sailing, sailing, sailing over the Sea, they are going into
the West and leaving us,’ said Sam, half chanting the words, shaking
his head sadly and solemnly. But Ted laughed.
‘Well, that isn’t anything new, if you believe the old tales. And I
don’t see what it matters to me or you. Let them sail! But I warrant
you haven’t seen them doing it; nor anyone else in the Shire.’
‘Well, I don’t know,’ said Sam thoughtfully. He believed he had
once seen an Elf in the woods, and still hoped to see more one day.
Of all the legends that he had heard in his early years such fragments
of tales and half-remembered stories about the Elves as the hobbits
knew, had always moved him most deeply. ‘There are some, even in
these parts, as know the Fair Folk and get news of them,’ he said.
‘There’s Mr. Baggins now, that I work for. He told me that they
were sailing and he knows a bit about Elves. And old Mr. Bilbo knew
more: many’s the talk I had with him when I was a little lad.’
‘Oh, they’re both cracked,’ said Ted. ‘Leastways old Bilbo was
cracked, and Frodo’s cracking. If that’s where you get your news
from, you’ll never want for moonshine. Well, friends, I’m off home.
Your good health!’ He drained his mug and went out noisily.
Sam sat silent and said no more. He had a good deal to think
about. For one thing, there was a lot to do up in the Bag End garden,
and he would have a busy day tomorrow, if the weather cleared. The
grass was growing fast. But Sam had more on his mind than garden-
ing. After a while he sighed, and got up and went out.
It was early April and the sky was now clearing after heavy rain.
The sun was down, and a cool pale evening was quietly fading into
night. He walked home under the early stars through Hobbiton and
up the Hill, whistling softly and thoughtfully.
*
*
*

It was just at this time that Gandalf reappeared after his long
absence. For three years after the Party he had been away. Then he
paid Frodo a brief visit, and after taking a good look at him he went
off again. During the next year or two he had turned up fairly often,
coming unexpectedly after dusk, and going off without warning
before sunrise. He would not discuss his own business and journeys,
and seemed chieﬂy interested in small news about Frodo’s health
and doings.
Then suddenly his visits had ceased. It was over nine years since
Frodo had seen or heard of him, and he had begun to think that the
wizard would never return and had given up all interest in hobbits.
But that evening, as Sam was walking home and twilight was fading,
there came the once familiar tap on the study window.
Frodo welcomed his old friend with surprise and great delight.
They looked hard at one another.
‘All well eh?’ said Gandalf. ‘You look the same as ever, Frodo!’
‘So do you,’ Frodo replied; but secretly he thought that Gandalf
looked older and more careworn. He pressed him for news of himself
and of the wide world, and soon they were deep in talk, and they
stayed up far into the night.
Next morning after a late breakfast, the wizard was sitting with
Frodo by the open window of the study. A bright ﬁre was on the
hearth, but the sun was warm, and the wind was in the South. Every-
thing looked fresh, and the new green of spring was shimmering in
the ﬁelds and on the tips of the trees’ ﬁngers.
Gandalf was thinking of a spring, nearly eighty years before, when
Bilbo had run out of Bag End without a handkerchief. His hair was
perhaps whiter than it had been then, and his beard and eyebrows
were perhaps longer, and his face more lined with care and wisdom;
but his eyes were as bright as ever, and he smoked and blew smoke-
rings with the same vigour and delight.
He was smoking now in silence, for Frodo was sitting still, deep
in thought. Even in the light of morning he felt the dark shadow of
the tidings that Gandalf had brought. At last he broke the silence.
‘Last night you began to tell me strange things about my ring,
Gandalf,’ he said. ‘And then you stopped, because you said that such
matters were best left until daylight. Don’t you think you had better
ﬁnish now? You say the ring is dangerous, far more dangerous than
I guess. In what way?’
‘In many ways,’ answered the wizard. ‘It is far more powerful than
I ever dared to think at ﬁrst, so powerful that in the end it would
utterly overcome anyone of mortal race who possessed it. It would
possess him.

‘In Eregion long ago many Elven-rings were made, magic rings as
you call them, and they were, of course, of various kinds: some more
potent and some less. The lesser rings were only essays in the craft
before it was full-grown, and to the Elven-smiths they were but triﬂes
– yet still to my mind dangerous for mortals. But the Great Rings,
the Rings of Power, they were perilous.
‘A mortal, Frodo, who keeps one of the Great Rings, does not
die, but he does not grow or obtain more life, he merely continues,
until at last every minute is a weariness. And if he often uses the
Ring to make himself invisible, he fades: he becomes in the end
invisible permanently, and walks in the twilight under the eye of the
Dark Power that rules the Rings. Yes, sooner or later – later, if he is
strong or well-meaning to begin with, but neither strength nor good
purpose will last – sooner or later the Dark Power will devour him.’
‘How terrifying!’ said Frodo. There was another long silence. The
sound of Sam Gamgee cutting the lawn came in from the garden.
‘How long have you known this?’ asked Frodo at length. ‘And
how much did Bilbo know?’
‘Bilbo knew no more than he told you, I am sure,’ said Gandalf.
‘He would certainly never have passed on to you anything that he
thought would be a danger, even though I promised to look after
you. He thought the ring was very beautiful, and very useful at need;
and if anything was wrong or queer, it was himself. He said that it
was ‘‘growing on his mind’’, and he was always worrying about it;
but he did not suspect that the ring itself was to blame. Though he
had found out that the thing needed looking after; it did not seem
always of the same size or weight; it shrank or expanded in an odd
way, and might suddenly slip off a ﬁnger where it had been tight.’
‘Yes, he warned me of that in his last letter,’ said Frodo, ‘so I
have always kept it on its chain.’
‘Very wise,’ said Gandalf. ‘But as for his long life, Bilbo never con-
nected it with the ring at all. He took all the credit for that to himself,
and he was very proud of it. Though he was getting restless and uneasy.
Thin and stretched he said. A sign that the ring was getting control.’
‘How long have you known all this?’ asked Frodo again.
‘Known?’ said Gandalf. ‘I have known much that only the Wise
know, Frodo. But if you mean ‘‘known about this ring’’, well, I still
do not know, one might say. There is a last test to make. But I no
longer doubt my guess.
‘When did I ﬁrst begin to guess?’ he mused, searching back in
memory. ‘Let me see – it was in the year that the White Council
drove the Dark Power from Mirkwood, just before the Battle of Five
Armies, that Bilbo found his ring. A shadow fell on my heart then,

though I did not know yet what I feared. I wondered often how
Gollum came by a Great Ring, as plainly it was – that at least was
clear from the ﬁrst. Then I heard Bilbo’s strange story of how he had
‘‘won’’ it, and I could not believe it. When I at last got the truth out
of him, I saw at once that he had been trying to put his claim to the
ring beyond doubt. Much like Gollum with his ‘‘birthday-present’’.
The lies were too much alike for my comfort. Clearly the ring had
an unwholesome power that set to work on its keeper at once. That
was the ﬁrst real warning I had that all was not well. I told Bilbo
often that such rings were better left unused; but he resented it, and
soon got angry. There was little else that I could do. I could not take
it from him without doing greater harm; and I had no right to do so
anyway. I could only watch and wait. I might perhaps have consulted
Saruman the White, but something always held me back.’
‘Who is he?’ asked Frodo. ‘I have never heard of him before.’
‘Maybe not,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Hobbits are, or were, no concern
of his. Yet he is great among the Wise. He is the chief of my order
and the head of the Council. His knowledge is deep, but his pride
has grown with it, and he takes ill any meddling. The lore of the
Elven-rings, great and small, is his province. He has long studied it,
seeking the lost secrets of their making; but when the Rings were
debated in the Council, all that he would reveal to us of his ring-lore
told against my fears. So my doubt slept – but uneasily. Still I watched
and I waited.
‘And all seemed well with Bilbo. And the years passed. Yes, they
passed, and they seemed not to touch him. He showed no signs of
age. The shadow fell on me again. But I said to myself: ‘‘After all he
comes of a long-lived family on his mother’s side. There is time yet.
Wait!’’
‘And I waited. Until that night when he left this house. He said
and did things then that ﬁlled me with a fear that no words of
Saruman could allay. I knew at last that something dark and deadly
was at work. And I have spent most of the years since then in ﬁnding
out the truth of it.’
‘There wasn’t any permanent harm done, was there?’ asked Frodo
anxiously. ‘He would get all right in time, wouldn’t he? Be able to
rest in peace, I mean?’
‘He felt better at once,’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is only one Power
in this world that knows all about the Rings and their effects; and as
far as I know there is no Power in the world that knows all about
hobbits. Among the Wise I am the only one that goes in for hobbit-
lore: an obscure branch of knowledge, but full of surprises. Soft as
butter they can be, and yet sometimes as tough as old tree-roots. I
think it likely that some would resist the Rings far longer than most

of the Wise would believe. I don’t think you need worry about Bilbo.
‘Of course, he possessed the ring for many years, and used it, so
it might take a long while for the inﬂuence to wear off – before it
was safe for him to see it again, for instance. Otherwise, he might
live on for years, quite happily: just stop as he was when he parted
with it. For he gave it up in the end of his own accord: an important
point. No, I was not troubled about dear Bilbo any more, once he
had let the thing go. It is for you that I feel responsible.
‘Ever since Bilbo left I have been deeply concerned about you,
and about all these charming, absurd, helpless hobbits. It would be
a grievous blow to the world, if the Dark Power overcame the Shire;
if all your kind, jolly, stupid Bolgers, Hornblowers, Bofﬁns, Brace-
girdles, and the rest, not to mention the ridiculous Bagginses, became
enslaved.’
Frodo shuddered. ‘But why should we be?’ he asked. ‘And why
should he want such slaves?’
‘To tell you the truth,’ replied Gandalf, ‘I believe that hitherto –
hitherto, mark you – he has entirely overlooked the existence of
hobbits. You should be thankful. But your safety has passed. He does
not need you – he has many more useful servants – but he won’t
forget you again. And hobbits as miserable slaves would please him
far more than hobbits happy and free. There is such a thing as malice
and revenge.’
‘Revenge?’ said Frodo. ‘Revenge for what? I still don’t understand
what all this has to do with Bilbo and myself, and our ring.’
‘It has everything to do with it,’ said Gandalf. ‘You do not know
the real peril yet; but you shall. I was not sure of it myself when I
was last here; but the time has come to speak. Give me the ring for
a moment.’
Frodo took it from his breeches-pocket, where it was clasped to a
chain that hung from his belt. He unfastened it and handed it slowly
to the wizard. It felt suddenly very heavy, as if either it or Frodo
himself was in some way reluctant for Gandalf to touch it.
Gandalf held it up. It looked to be made of pure and solid gold.
‘Can you see any markings on it?’ he asked.
‘No,’ said Frodo. ‘There are none. It is quite plain, and it never
shows a scratch or sign of wear.’
‘Well then, look!’ To Frodo’s astonishment and distress the wizard
threw it suddenly into the middle of a glowing corner of the ﬁre.
Frodo gave a cry and groped for the tongs; but Gandalf held him
back.
‘Wait!’ he said in a commanding voice, giving Frodo a quick look
from under his bristling brows.

No apparent change came over the ring. After a while Gandalf got
up, closed the shutters outside the window, and drew the curtains.
The room became dark and silent, though the clack of Sam’s shears,
now nearer to the windows, could still be heard faintly from the
garden. For a moment the wizard stood looking at the ﬁre; then he
stooped and removed the ring to the hearth with the tongs, and at
once picked it up. Frodo gasped.
‘It is quite cool,’ said Gandalf. ‘Take it!’ Frodo received it on his
shrinking palm: it seemed to have become thicker and heavier than
ever.
‘Hold it up!’ said Gandalf. ‘And look closely!’
As Frodo did so, he now saw ﬁne lines, ﬁner than the ﬁnest pen-
strokes, running along the ring, outside and inside: lines of ﬁre that
seemed to form the letters of a ﬂowing script. They shone piercingly
bright, and yet remote, as if out of a great depth.
‘I cannot read the ﬁery letters,’ said Frodo in a quavering voice.
‘No,’ said Gandalf, ‘but I can. The letters are Elvish, of an ancient
mode, but the language is that of Mordor, which I will not utter here.
But this in the Common Tongue is what is said, close enough:
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to ﬁnd them,
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them.
It is only two lines of a verse long known in Elven-lore:
Three Rings for the Elven-kings under the sky,
Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone,
Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die,
One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to ﬁnd them,
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.’
He paused, and then said slowly in a deep voice: ‘This is the
Master-ring, the One Ring to rule them all. This is the One Ring

that he lost many ages ago, to the great weakening of his power. He
greatly desires it – but he must not get it.’
Frodo sat silent and motionless. Fear seemed to stretch out a vast
hand, like a dark cloud rising in the East and looming up to engulf
him. ‘This ring!’ he stammered. ‘How, how on earth did it come to
me?’
‘Ah!’ said Gandalf. ‘That is a very long story. The beginnings lie
back in the Black Years, which only the lore-masters now remember.
If I were to tell you all that tale, we should still be sitting here when
Spring had passed into Winter.
‘But last night I told you of Sauron the Great, the Dark Lord.
The rumours that you have heard are true: he has indeed arisen again
and left his hold in Mirkwood and returned to his ancient fastness
in the Dark Tower of Mordor. That name even you hobbits have
heard of, like a shadow on the borders of old stories. Always after a
defeat and a respite, the Shadow takes another shape and grows
again.’
‘I wish it need not have happened in my time,’ said Frodo.
‘So do I,’ said Gandalf, ‘and so do all who live to see such times.
But that is not for them to decide. All we have to decide is what to
do with the time that is given us. And already, Frodo, our time is
beginning to look black. The Enemy is fast becoming very strong.
His plans are far from ripe, I think, but they are ripening. We shall
be hard put to it. We should be very hard put to it, even if it were
not for this dreadful chance.
‘The Enemy still lacks one thing to give him strength and know-
ledge to beat down all resistance, break the last defences, and cover
all the lands in a second darkness. He lacks the One Ring.
‘The Three, fairest of all, the Elf-lords hid from him, and his
hand never touched them or sullied them. Seven the Dwarf-kings
possessed, but three he has recovered, and the others the dragons
have consumed. Nine he gave to Mortal Men, proud and great, and
so ensnared them. Long ago they fell under the dominion of the One,
and they became Ringwraiths, shadows under his great Shadow, his
most terrible servants. Long ago. It is many a year since the Nine
walked abroad. Yet who knows? As the Shadow grows once more,
they too may walk again. But come! We will not speak of such things
even in the morning of the Shire.
‘So it is now: the Nine he has gathered to himself; the Seven also,
or else they are destroyed. The Three are hidden still. But that no
longer troubles him. He only needs the One; for he made that Ring
himself, it is his, and he let a great part of his own former power pass
into it, so that he could rule all the others. If he recovers it, then he

will command them all again, wherever they be, even the Three, and
all that has been wrought with them will be laid bare, and he will be
stronger than ever.
‘And this is the dreadful chance, Frodo. He believed that the One
had perished; that the Elves had destroyed it, as should have been
done. But he knows now that it has not perished, that it has been
found. So he is seeking it, seeking it, and all his thought is bent on
it. It is his great hope and our great fear.’
‘Why, why wasn’t it destroyed?’ cried Frodo. ‘And how did the
Enemy ever come to lose it, if he was so strong, and it was so precious
to him?’ He clutched the Ring in his hand, as if he saw already dark
ﬁngers stretching out to seize it.
‘It was taken from him,’ said Gandalf. ‘The strength of the Elves
to resist him was greater long ago; and not all Men were estranged
from them. The Men of Westernesse came to their aid. That is a
chapter of ancient history which it might be good to recall; for there
was sorrow then too, and gathering dark, but great valour, and great
deeds that were not wholly vain. One day, perhaps, I will tell you all
the tale, or you shall hear it told in full by one who knows it best.
‘But for the moment, since most of all you need to know how
this thing came to you, and that will be tale enough, this is all that
I will say. It was Gil-galad, Elven-king and Elendil of Westernesse
who overthrew Sauron, though they themselves perished in the deed;
and Isildur Elendil’s son cut the Ring from Sauron’s hand and took
it for his own. Then Sauron was vanquished and his spirit ﬂed and
was hidden for long years, until his shadow took shape again in
Mirkwood.
‘But the Ring was lost. It fell into the Great River, Anduin, and
vanished. For Isildur was marching north along the east banks of the
River, and near the Gladden Fields he was waylaid by the Orcs of
the Mountains, and almost all his folk were slain. He leaped into the
waters, but the Ring slipped from his ﬁnger as he swam, and then
the Orcs saw him and killed him with arrows.’
Gandalf paused. ‘And there in the dark pools amid the Gladden
Fields,’ he said, ‘the Ring passed out of knowledge and legend; and
even so much of its history is known now only to a few, and the
Council of the Wise could discover no more. But at last I can carry
on the story, I think.
‘Long after, but still very long ago, there lived by the banks of the
Great River on the edge of Wilderland a clever-handed and quiet-
footed little people. I guess they were of hobbit-kind; akin to the
fathers of the fathers of the Stoors, for they loved the River, and often
swam in it, or made little boats of reeds. There was among them a

family of high repute, for it was large and wealthier than most, and
it was ruled by a grandmother of the folk, stern and wise in old lore,
such as they had. The most inquisitive and curious-minded of that
family was called Sme´agol. He was interested in roots and beginnings;
he dived into deep pools; he burrowed under trees and growing
plants; he tunnelled into green mounds; and he ceased to look up at
the hill-tops, or the leaves on trees, or the ﬂowers opening in the air:
his head and his eyes were downward.
‘He had a friend called De´agol, of similar sort, sharper-eyed but
not so quick and strong. On a time they took a boat and went down
to the Gladden Fields, where there were great beds of iris and ﬂower-
ing reeds. There Sme´agol got out and went nosing about the banks
but De´agol sat in the boat and ﬁshed. Suddenly a great ﬁsh took his
hook, and before he knew where he was, he was dragged out and
down into the water, to the bottom. Then he let go of his line, for
he thought he saw something shining in the river-bed; and holding
his breath he grabbed at it.
‘Then up he came spluttering, with weeds in his hair and a handful
of mud; and he swam to the bank. And behold! when he washed the
mud away, there in his hand lay a beautiful golden ring; and it shone
and glittered in the sun, so that his heart was glad. But Sme´agol had
been watching him from behind a tree, and as De´agol gloated over
the ring, Sme´agol came softly up behind.
‘ ‘‘Give us that, De´agol, my love,’’ said Sme´agol, over his friend’s
shoulder.
‘ ‘‘Why?’’ said De´agol.
‘ ‘‘Because it’s my birthday, my love, and I wants it,’’ said Sme´agol.
‘ ‘‘I don’t care,’’ said De´agol. ‘‘I have given you a present already,
more than I could afford. I found this, and I’m going to keep it.’’
‘ ‘‘Oh, are you indeed, my love,’’ said Sme´agol; and he caught
De´agol by the throat and strangled him, because the gold looked so
bright and beautiful. Then he put the ring on his ﬁnger.
‘No one ever found out what had become of De´agol; he was
murdered far from home, and his body was cunningly hidden. But
Sme´agol returned alone; and he found that none of his family could
see him, when he was wearing the ring. He was very pleased with
his discovery and he concealed it; and he used it to ﬁnd out secrets,
and he put his knowledge to crooked and malicious uses. He became
sharp-eyed and keen-eared for all that was hurtful. The ring had
given him power according to his stature. It is not to be wondered
at that he became very unpopular and was shunned (when visible)
by all his relations. They kicked him, and he bit their feet. He took
to thieving, and going about muttering to himself, and gurgling in
his throat. So they called him Gollum, and cursed him, and told him

to go far away; and his grandmother, desiring peace, expelled him
from the family and turned him out of her hole.
‘He wandered in loneliness, weeping a little for the hardness of
the world, and he journeyed up the River, till he came to a stream
that ﬂowed down from the mountains, and he went that way. He
caught ﬁsh in deep pools with invisible ﬁngers and ate them raw.
One day it was very hot, and as he was bending over a pool, he felt
a burning on the back of his head, and a dazzling light from the water
pained his wet eyes. He wondered at it, for he had almost forgotten
about the Sun. Then for the last time he looked up and shook his
ﬁst at her.
‘But as he lowered his eyes, he saw far ahead the tops of the Misty
Mountains, out of which the stream came. And he thought suddenly:
‘‘It would be cool and shady under those mountains. The Sun could
not watch me there. The roots of those mountains must be roots
indeed; there must be great secrets buried there which have not been
discovered since the beginning.’’
‘So he journeyed by night up into the highlands, and he found a
little cave out of which the dark stream ran; and he wormed his way
like a maggot into the heart of the hills, and vanished out of all
knowledge. The Ring went into the shadows with him, and even the
maker, when his power had begun to grow again, could learn nothing
of it.’
‘Gollum!’ cried Frodo. ‘Gollum? Do you mean that this is the very
Gollum-creature that Bilbo met? How loathsome!’
‘I think it is a sad story,’ said the wizard, ‘and it might have
happened to others, even to some hobbits that I have known.’
‘I can’t believe that Gollum was connected with hobbits, however
distantly,’ said Frodo with some heat. ‘What an abominable notion!’
‘It is true all the same,’ replied Gandalf. ‘About their origins, at
any rate, I know more than hobbits do themselves. And even Bilbo’s
story suggests the kinship. There was a great deal in the background
of their minds and memories that was very similar. They understood
one another remarkably well, very much better than a hobbit would
understand, say, a Dwarf, or an Orc, or even an Elf. Think of the
riddles they both knew, for one thing.’
‘Yes,’ said Frodo. ‘Though other folks besides hobbits ask riddles,
and of much the same sort. And hobbits don’t cheat. Gollum meant
to cheat all the time. He was just trying to put poor Bilbo off his
guard. And I daresay it amused his wickedness to start a game which
might end in providing him with an easy victim, but if he lost would
not hurt him.’
‘Only too true, I fear,’ said Gandalf. ‘But there was something

else in it, I think, which you don’t see yet. Even Gollum was not
wholly ruined. He had proved tougher than even one of the Wise
would have guessed – as a hobbit might. There was a little corner of
his mind that was still his own, and light came through it, as through
a chink in the dark: light out of the past. It was actually pleasant, I
think, to hear a kindly voice again, bringing up memories of wind,
and trees, and sun on the grass, and such forgotten things.
‘But that, of course, would only make the evil part of him angrier
in the end – unless it could be conquered. Unless it could be cured.’
Gandalf sighed. ‘Alas! there is little hope of that for him. Yet not no
hope. No, not though he possessed the Ring so long, almost as far
back as he can remember. For it was long since he had worn it much:
in the black darkness it was seldom needed. Certainly he had never
‘‘faded’’. He is thin and tough still. But the thing was eating up his
mind, of course, and the torment had become almost unbearable.
‘All the ‘‘great secrets’’ under the mountains had turned out to
be just empty night: there was nothing more to ﬁnd out, nothing
worth doing, only nasty furtive eating and resentful remembering.
He was altogether wretched. He hated the dark, and he hated light
more: he hated everything, and the Ring most of all.’
‘What do you mean?’ said Frodo. ‘Surely the Ring was his Precious
and the only thing he cared for? But if he hated it, why didn’t he get
rid of it, or go away and leave it?’
‘You ought to begin to understand, Frodo, after all you have
heard,’ said Gandalf. ‘He hated it and loved it, as he hated and loved
himself. He could not get rid of it. He had no will left in the matter.
‘A Ring of Power looks after itself, Frodo. It may slip off treacher-
ously, but its keeper never abandons it. At most he plays with the
idea of handing it on to someone else’s care – and that only at an
early stage, when it ﬁrst begins to grip. But as far as I know Bilbo
alone in history has ever gone beyond playing, and really done it. He
needed all my help, too. And even so he would never have just
forsaken it, or cast it aside. It was not Gollum, Frodo, but the Ring
itself that decided things. The Ring left him.’
‘What, just in time to meet Bilbo?’ said Frodo. ‘Wouldn’t an Orc
have suited it better?’
‘It is no laughing matter,’ said Gandalf. ‘Not for you. It was the
strangest event in the whole history of the Ring so far: Bilbo’s arrival
just at that time, and putting his hand on it, blindly, in the dark.
‘There was more than one power at work, Frodo. The Ring was
trying to get back to its master. It had slipped from Isildur’s hand
and betrayed him; then when a chance came it caught poor De´agol,
and he was murdered; and after that Gollum, and it had devoured
him. It could make no further use of him: he was too small and

mean; and as long as it stayed with him he would never leave his
deep pool again. So now, when its master was awake once more and
sending out his dark thought from Mirkwood, it abandoned Gollum.
Only to be picked up by the most unlikely person imaginable: Bilbo
from the Shire!
‘Behind that there was something else at work, beyond any design
of the Ring-maker. I can put it no plainer than by saying that Bilbo
was meant to ﬁnd the Ring, and not by its maker. In which case you
also were meant to have it. And that may be an encouraging thought.’
‘It is not,’ said Frodo. ‘Though I am not sure that I understand
you. But how have you learned all this about the Ring, and about
Gollum? Do you really know it all, or are you just guessing still?’
Gandalf looked at Frodo, and his eyes glinted. ‘I knew much and
I have learned much,’ he answered. ‘But I am not going to give an
account of all my doings to you. The history of Elendil and Isildur
and the One Ring is known to all the Wise. Your ring is shown to
be that One Ring by the ﬁre-writing alone, apart from any other
evidence.’
‘And when did you discover that?’ asked Frodo, interrupting.
‘Just now in this room, of course,’ answered the wizard sharply.
‘But I expected to ﬁnd it. I have come back from dark journeys
and long search to make that ﬁnal test. It is the last proof, and all is
now only too clear. Making out Gollum’s part, and ﬁtting it into the
gap in the history, required some thought. I may have started with
guesses about Gollum, but I am not guessing now. I know. I have
seen him.’
‘You have seen Gollum?’ exclaimed Frodo in amazement.
‘Yes. The obvious thing to do, of course, if one could. I tried long
ago; but I have managed it at last.’
‘Then what happened after Bilbo escaped from him? Do you know
that?’
‘Not so clearly. What I have told you is what Gollum was willing
to tell – though not, of course, in the way I have reported it. Gollum
is a liar, and you have to sift his words. For instance, he called the
Ring his ‘‘birthday-present’’, and he stuck to that. He said it came
from his grandmother, who had lots of beautiful things of that kind.
A ridiculous story. I have no doubt that Sme´agol’s grandmother was
a matriarch, a great person in her way, but to talk of her possessing
many Elven-rings was absurd, and as for giving them away, it was a
lie. But a lie with a grain of truth.
‘The murder of De´agol haunted Gollum, and he had made up a
defence, repeating it to his ‘‘Precious’’ over and over again, as he
gnawed bones in the dark, until he almost believed it. It was his
birthday. De´agol ought to have given the ring to him. It had obviously

turned up just so as to be a present. It was his birthday-present, and
so on, and on.
‘I endured him as long as I could, but the truth was desperately
important, and in the end I had to be harsh. I put the fear of ﬁre on
him, and wrung the true story out of him, bit by bit, together with
much snivelling and snarling. He thought he was misunderstood and
ill-used. But when he had at last told me his history, as far as the
end of the Riddle-game and Bilbo’s escape, he would not say any
more, except in dark hints. Some other fear was on him greater than
mine. He muttered that he was going to get his own back. People
would see if he would stand being kicked, and driven into a hole and
then robbed. Gollum had good friends now, good friends and very
strong. They would help him. Baggins would pay for it. That was
his chief thought. He hated Bilbo and cursed his name. What is more,
he knew where he came from.’
‘But how did he ﬁnd that out?’ asked Frodo.
‘Well, as for the name, Bilbo very foolishly told Gollum himself;
and after that it would not be difﬁcult to discover his country, once
Gollum came out. Oh yes, he came out. His longing for the Ring
proved stronger than his fear of the Orcs, or even of the light. After
a year or two he left the mountains. You see, though still bound by
desire of it, the Ring was no longer devouring him; he began to revive
a little. He felt old, terribly old, yet less timid, and he was mortally
hungry.
‘Light, light of Sun and Moon, he still feared and hated, and he
always will, I think; but he was cunning. He found he could hide
from daylight and moonshine, and make his way swiftly and softly
by dead of night with his pale cold eyes, and catch small frightened
or unwary things. He grew stronger and bolder with new food and
new air. He found his way into Mirkwood, as one would expect.’
‘Is that where you found him?’ asked Frodo.
‘I saw him there,’ answered Gandalf, ‘but before that he had wan-
dered far, following Bilbo’s trail. It was difﬁcult to learn anything
from him for certain, for his talk was constantly interrupted by curses
and threats. ‘‘What had it got in its pocketses?’’ he said. ‘‘It wouldn’t
say, no precious. Little cheat. Not a fair question. It cheated ﬁrst, it
did. It broke the rules. We ought to have squeezed it, yes precious.
And we will, precious!’’
‘That is a sample of his talk. I don’t suppose you want any more.
I had weary days of it. But from hints dropped among the snarls
I gathered that his padding feet had taken him at last to Esgaroth,
and even to the streets of Dale, listening secretly and peering. Well,
the news of the great events went far and wide in Wilderland, and
many had heard Bilbo’s name and knew where he came from. We

had made no secret of our return journey to his home in the West.
Gollum’s sharp ears would soon learn what he wanted.’
‘Then why didn’t he track Bilbo further?’ asked Frodo. ‘Why didn’t
he come to the Shire?’
‘Ah,’ said Gandalf, ‘now we come to it. I think Gollum tried to.
He set out and came back westward, as far as the Great River. But
then he turned aside. He was not daunted by the distance, I am sure.
No, something else drew him away. So my friends think, those that
hunted him for me.
‘The Wood-elves tracked him ﬁrst, an easy task for them, for his
trail was still fresh then. Through Mirkwood and back again it led
them, though they never caught him. The wood was full of the
rumour of him, dreadful tales even among beasts and birds. The
Woodmen said that there was some new terror abroad, a ghost that
drank blood. It climbed trees to ﬁnd nests; it crept into holes to ﬁnd
the young; it slipped through windows to ﬁnd cradles.
‘But at the western edge of Mirkwood the trail turned away. It
wandered off southwards and passed out of the Wood-elves’ ken,
and was lost. And then I made a great mistake. Yes, Frodo, and not
the ﬁrst; though I fear it may prove the worst. I let the matter be. I
let him go; for I had much else to think of at that time, and I still
trusted the lore of Saruman.
‘Well, that was years ago. I have paid for it since with many dark
and dangerous days. The trail was long cold when I took it up again,
after Bilbo left here. And my search would have been in vain, but
for the help that I had from a friend: Aragorn, the greatest traveller
and huntsman of this age of the world. Together we sought for
Gollum down the whole length of Wilderland, without hope, and
without success. But at last, when I had given up the chase and
turned to other paths, Gollum was found. My friend returned out of
great perils bringing the miserable creature with him.
‘What he had been doing he would not say. He only wept and
called us cruel, with many a gollum in his throat; and when we pressed
him he whined and cringed, and rubbed his long hands, licking his
ﬁngers as if they pained him, as if he remembered some old torture.
But I am afraid there is no possible doubt: he had made his slow,
sneaking way, step by step, mile by mile, south, down at last to the
Land of Mordor.’
A heavy silence fell in the room. Frodo could hear his heart beating.
Even outside everything seemed still. No sound of Sam’s shears could
now be heard.
‘Yes, to Mordor,’ said Gandalf. ‘Alas! Mordor draws all wicked
things, and the Dark Power was bending all its will to gather them

there. The Ring of the Enemy would leave its mark, too, leave him
open to the summons. And all folk were whispering then of the new
Shadow in the South, and its hatred of the West. There were his ﬁne
new friends, who would help him in his revenge!
‘Wretched fool! In that land he would learn much, too much for
his comfort. And sooner or later as he lurked and pried on the borders
he would be caught, and taken – for examination. That was the way
of it, I fear. When he was found he had already been there long, and
was on his way back. On some errand of mischief. But that does not
matter much now. His worst mischief was done.
‘Yes, alas! through him the Enemy has learned that the One has
been found again. He knows where Isildur fell. He knows where
Gollum found his ring. He knows that it is a Great Ring, for it gave
long life. He knows that it is not one of the Three, for they have
never been lost, and they endure no evil. He knows that it is not one
of the Seven, or the Nine, for they are accounted for. He knows that
it is the One. And he has at last heard, I think, of hobbits and the
Shire.
‘The Shire – he may be seeking for it now, if he has not already
found out where it lies. Indeed, Frodo, I fear that he may even think
that the long-unnoticed name of Baggins has become important.’
‘But this is terrible!’ cried Frodo. ‘Far worse than the worst that
I imagined from your hints and warnings. O Gandalf, best of friends,
what am I to do? For now I am really afraid. What am I to do? What
a pity that Bilbo did not stab that vile creature, when he had a chance!’
‘Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and Mercy: not to
strike without need. And he has been well rewarded, Frodo. Be sure
that he took so little hurt from the evil, and escaped in the end,
because he began his ownership of the Ring so. With Pity.’
‘I am sorry,’ said Frodo. ‘But I am frightened; and I do not feel
any pity for Gollum.’
‘You have not seen him,’ Gandalf broke in.
‘No, and I don’t want to,’ said Frodo. ‘I can’t understand you.
Do you mean to say that you, and the Elves, have let him live on
after all those horrible deeds? Now at any rate he is as bad as an Orc,
and just an enemy. He deserves death.’
‘Deserves it! I daresay he does. Many that live deserve death. And
some that die deserve life. Can you give it to them? Then do not be
too eager to deal out death in judgement. For even the very wise
cannot see all ends. I have not much hope that Gollum can be cured
before he dies, but there is a chance of it. And he is bound up with
the fate of the Ring. My heart tells me that he has some part to play
yet, for good or ill, before the end; and when that comes, the pity of
Bilbo may rule the fate of many – yours not least. In any case we did

not kill him: he is very old and very wretched. The Wood-elves have
him in prison, but they treat him with such kindness as they can ﬁnd
in their wise hearts.’
‘All the same,’ said Frodo, ‘even if Bilbo could not kill Gollum, I
wish he had not kept the Ring. I wish he had never found it, and
that I had not got it! Why did you let me keep it? Why didn’t you
make me throw it away, or, or destroy it?’
‘Let you? Make you?’ said the wizard. ‘Haven’t you been listening
to all that I have said? You are not thinking of what you are saying.
But as for throwing it away, that was obviously wrong. These Rings
have a way of being found. In evil hands it might have done great
evil. Worst of all, it might have fallen into the hands of the Enemy.
Indeed it certainly would; for this is the One, and he is exerting all
his power to ﬁnd it or draw it to himself.
‘Of course, my dear Frodo, it was dangerous for you; and that has
troubled me deeply. But there was so much at stake that I had to
take some risk – though even when I was far away there has never
been a day when the Shire has not been guarded by watchful eyes.
As long as you never used it, I did not think that the Ring would
have any lasting effect on you, not for evil, not at any rate for a very
long time. And you must remember that nine years ago, when I last
saw you, I still knew little for certain.’
‘But why not destroy it, as you say should have been done long
ago?’ cried Frodo again. ‘If you had warned me, or even sent me a
message, I would have done away with it.’
‘Would you? How would you do that? Have you ever tried?’
‘No. But I suppose one could hammer it or melt it.’
‘Try!’ said Gandalf. ‘Try now!’
Frodo drew the Ring out of his pocket again and looked at it. It
now appeared plain and smooth, without mark or device that he
could see. The gold looked very fair and pure, and Frodo thought
how rich and beautiful was its colour, how perfect was its roundness.
It was an admirable thing and altogether precious. When he took it
out he had intended to ﬂing it from him into the very hottest part of
the ﬁre. But he found now that he could not do so, not without a
great struggle. He weighed the Ring in his hand, hesitating, and
forcing himself to remember all that Gandalf had told him; and then
with an effort of will he made a movement, as if to cast it away –
but he found that he had put it back in his pocket.
Gandalf laughed grimly. ‘You see? Already you too, Frodo, cannot
easily let it go, nor will to damage it. And I could not ‘‘make’’ you
– except by force, which would break your mind. But as for breaking
the Ring, force is useless. Even if you took it and struck it with a

heavy sledge-hammer, it would make no dint in it. It cannot be
unmade by your hands, or by mine.
‘Your small ﬁre, of course, would not melt even ordinary gold. This
Ring has already passed through it unscathed, and even unheated. But
there is no smith’s forge in this Shire that could change it at all. Not
even the anvils and furnaces of the Dwarves could do that. It has
been said that dragon-ﬁre could melt and consume the Rings of
Power, but there is not now any dragon left on earth in which the
old ﬁre is hot enough; nor was there ever any dragon, not even
Ancalagon the Black, who could have harmed the One Ring, the
Ruling Ring, for that was made by Sauron himself.
‘There is only one way: to ﬁnd the Cracks of Doom in the depths
of Orodruin, the Fire-mountain, and cast the Ring in there, if you
really wish to destroy it, to put it beyond the grasp of the Enemy for
ever.’
‘I do really wish to destroy it!’ cried Frodo. ‘Or, well, to have it
destroyed. I am not made for perilous quests. I wish I had never seen
the Ring! Why did it come to me? Why was I chosen?’
‘Such questions cannot be answered,’ said Gandalf. ‘You may be
sure that it was not for any merit that others do not possess: not for
power or wisdom, at any rate. But you have been chosen, and you
must therefore use such strength and heart and wits as you have.’
‘But I have so little of any of these things! You are wise and
powerful. Will you not take the Ring?’
‘No!’ cried Gandalf, springing to his feet. ‘With that power I should
have power too great and terrible. And over me the Ring would gain
a power still greater and more deadly.’ His eyes ﬂashed and his face
was lit as by a ﬁre within. ‘Do not tempt me! For I do not wish to
become like the Dark Lord himself. Yet the way of the Ring to my
heart is by pity, pity for weakness and the desire of strength to do
good. Do not tempt me! I dare not take it, not even to keep it safe,
unused. The wish to wield it would be too great for my strength. I
shall have such need of it. Great perils lie before me.’
He went to the window and drew aside the curtains and the shut-
ters. Sunlight streamed back again into the room. Sam passed along
the path outside whistling. ‘And now,’ said the wizard, turning back
to Frodo, ‘the decision lies with you. But I will always help you.’ He
laid his hand on Frodo’s shoulder. ‘I will help you bear this burden,
as long as it is yours to bear. But we must do something, soon. The
Enemy is moving.’
There was a long silence. Gandalf sat down again and puffed at
his pipe, as if lost in thought. His eyes seemed closed, but under the
lids he was watching Frodo intently. Frodo gazed ﬁxedly at the red

embers on the hearth, until they ﬁlled all his vision, and he seemed
to be looking down into profound wells of ﬁre. He was thinking of
the fabled Cracks of Doom and the terror of the Fiery Mountain.
‘Well!’ said Gandalf at last. ‘What are you thinking about? Have
you decided what to do?’
‘No!’ answered Frodo, coming back to himself out of darkness,
and ﬁnding to his surprise that it was not dark, and that out of the
window he could see the sunlit garden. ‘Or perhaps, yes. As far as I
understand what you have said, I suppose I must keep the Ring and
guard it, at least for the present, whatever it may do to me.’
‘Whatever it may do, it will be slow, slow to evil, if you keep it
with that purpose,’ said Gandalf.
‘I hope so,’ said Frodo. ‘But I hope that you may ﬁnd some other
better keeper soon. But in the meanwhile it seems that I am a danger,
a danger to all that live near me. I cannot keep the Ring and stay
here. I ought to leave Bag End, leave the Shire, leave everything and
go away.’ He sighed.
‘I should like to save the Shire, if I could – though there have been
times when I thought the inhabitants too stupid and dull for words,
and have felt that an earthquake or an invasion of dragons might be
good for them. But I don’t feel like that now. I feel that as long as
the Shire lies behind, safe and comfortable, I shall ﬁnd wandering
more bearable: I shall know that somewhere there is a ﬁrm foothold,
even if my feet cannot stand there again.
‘Of course, I have sometimes thought of going away, but I imag-
ined that as a kind of holiday, a series of adventures like Bilbo’s or
better, ending in peace. But this would mean exile, a ﬂight from
danger into danger, drawing it after me. And I suppose I must go
alone, if I am to do that and save the Shire. But I feel very small,
and very uprooted, and well – desperate. The Enemy is so strong
and terrible.’
He did not tell Gandalf, but as he was speaking a great desire to
follow Bilbo ﬂamed up in his heart – to follow Bilbo, and even perhaps
to ﬁnd him again. It was so strong that it overcame his fear: he could
almost have run out there and then down the road without his hat,
as Bilbo had done on a similar morning long ago.
‘My dear Frodo!’ exclaimed Gandalf. ‘Hobbits really are amazing
creatures, as I have said before. You can learn all that there is to
know about their ways in a month, and yet after a hundred years
they can still surprise you at a pinch. I hardly expected to get such
an answer, not even from you. But Bilbo made no mistake in choosing
his heir, though he little thought how important it would prove. I
am afraid you are right. The Ring will not be able to stay hidden in
the Shire much longer; and for your own sake, as well as for others,

you will have to go, and leave the name of Baggins behind you. That
name will not be safe to have, outside the Shire or in the Wild. I will
give you a travelling name now. When you go, go as Mr. Underhill.
‘But I don’t think you need go alone. Not if you know of anyone
you can trust, and who would be willing to go by your side – and
that you would be willing to take into unknown perils. But if you
look for a companion, be careful in choosing! And be careful of what
you say, even to your closest friends! The enemy has many spies and
many ways of hearing.’
Suddenly he stopped as if listening. Frodo became aware that all
was very quiet, inside and outside. Gandalf crept to one side of the
window. Then with a dart he sprang to the sill, and thrust a long
arm out and downwards. There was a squawk, and up came Sam
Gamgee’s curly head hauled by one ear.
‘Well, well, bless my beard!’ said Gandalf. ‘Sam Gamgee is it?
Now what may you be doing?’
‘Lor bless you, Mr. Gandalf, sir!’ said Sam. ‘Nothing! Leastways
I was just trimming the grass-border under the window, if you follow
me.’ He picked up his shears and exhibited them as evidence.
‘I don’t,’ said Gandalf grimly. ‘It is some time since I last heard
the sound of your shears. How long have you been eavesdropping?’
‘Eavesdropping, sir? I don’t follow you, begging your pardon.
There ain’t no eaves at Bag End, and that’s a fact.’
‘Don’t be a fool! What have you heard, and why did you listen?’
Gandalf ’s eyes ﬂashed and his brows stuck out like bristles.
‘Mr. Frodo, sir!’ cried Sam quaking. ‘Don’t let him hurt me, sir!
Don’t let him turn me into anything unnatural! My old dad would
take on so. I meant no harm, on my honour, sir!’
‘He won’t hurt you,’ said Frodo, hardly able to keep from laughing,
although he was himself startled and rather puzzled. ‘He knows, as
well as I do, that you mean no harm. But just you up and answer
his questions straight away!’
‘Well, sir,’ said Sam dithering a little. ‘I heard a deal that I didn’t
rightly understand, about an enemy, and rings, and Mr. Bilbo, sir,
and dragons, and a ﬁery mountain, and – and Elves, sir. I listened
because I couldn’t help myself, if you know what I mean. Lor bless
me, sir, but I do love tales of that sort. And I believe them too,
whatever Ted may say. Elves, sir! I would dearly love to see them.
Couldn’t you take me to see Elves, sir, when you go?’
Suddenly Gandalf laughed. ‘Come inside!’ he shouted, and putting
out both his arms he lifted the astonished Sam, shears, grass-clippings
and all, right through the window and stood him on the ﬂoor. ‘Take
you to see Elves, eh?’ he said, eyeing Sam closely, but with a smile
ﬂickering on his face. ‘So you heard that Mr. Frodo is going away?’

‘I did, sir. And that’s why I choked: which you heard seemingly.
I tried not to, sir, but it burst out of me: I was so upset.’
‘It can’t be helped, Sam,’ said Frodo sadly. He had suddenly
realized that ﬂying from the Shire would mean more painful partings
than merely saying farewell to the familiar comforts of Bag End. ‘I
shall have to go. But’ – and here he looked hard at Sam – ‘if you
really care about me, you will keep that dead secret. See? If you don’t,
if you even breathe a word of what you’ve heard here, then I hope
Gandalf will turn you into a spotted toad and ﬁll the garden full of
grass-snakes.’
Sam fell on his knees, trembling. ‘Get up, Sam!’ said Gandalf. ‘I
have thought of something better than that. Something to shut your
mouth, and punish you properly for listening. You shall go away with
Mr. Frodo!’
‘Me, sir!’ cried Sam, springing up like a dog invited for a walk.
‘Me go and see Elves and all! Hooray!’ he shouted, and then burst
into tears.

Chapter 3
T H R E E  I S  C O M P A N Y
‘You ought to go quietly, and you ought to go soon,’ said Gandalf.
Two or three weeks had passed, and still Frodo made no sign of
getting ready to go.
‘I know. But it is difﬁcult to do both,’ he objected. ‘If I just vanish
like Bilbo, the tale will be all over the Shire in no time.’
‘Of course you mustn’t vanish!’ said Gandalf. ‘That wouldn’t do
at all! I said soon, not instantly. If you can think of any way of slipping
out of the Shire without its being generally known, it will be worth
a little delay. But you must not delay too long.’
‘What about the autumn, on or after Our Birthday?’ asked Frodo.
‘I think I could probably make some arrangements by then.’
To tell the truth, he was very reluctant to start, now that it had
come to the point: Bag End seemed a more desirable residence than
it had for years, and he wanted to savour as much as he could of his
last summer in the Shire. When autumn came, he knew that part at
least of his heart would think more kindly of journeying, as it always
did at that season. He had indeed privately made up his mind to
leave on his ﬁftieth birthday: Bilbo’s one hundred and twenty-eighth.
It seemed somehow the proper day on which to set out and follow
him. Following Bilbo was uppermost in his mind, and the one thing
that made the thought of leaving bearable. He thought as little as
possible about the Ring, and where it might lead him in the end. But
he did not tell all his thoughts to Gandalf. What the wizard guessed
was always difﬁcult to tell.
He looked at Frodo and smiled. ‘Very well,’ he said. ‘I think that
will do – but it must not be any later. I am getting very anxious. In
the meanwhile, do take care, and don’t let out any hint of where you
are going! And see that Sam Gamgee does not talk. If he does, I
really shall turn him into a toad.’
‘As for where I am going,’ said Frodo, ‘it would be difﬁcult to give
that away, for I have no clear idea myself, yet.’
‘Don’t be absurd!’ said Gandalf. ‘I am not warning you against
leaving an address at the post-ofﬁce! But you are leaving the Shire –
and that should not be known, until you are far away. And you must
go, or at least set out, either North, South, West or East – and the
direction should certainly not be known.’
‘I have been so taken up with the thoughts of leaving Bag End, and
of saying farewell, that I have never even considered the direction,’

said Frodo. ‘For where am I to go? And by what shall I steer? What
is to be my quest? Bilbo went to ﬁnd a treasure, there and back again;
but I go to lose one, and not return, as far as I can see.’
‘But you cannot see very far,’ said Gandalf. ‘Neither can I. It may
be your task to ﬁnd the Cracks of Doom; but that quest may be for
others: I do not know. At any rate you are not ready for that long
road yet.’
‘No indeed!’ said Frodo. ‘But in the meantime what course am I
to take?’
‘Towards danger; but not too rashly, nor too straight,’ answered
the wizard. ‘If you want my advice, make for Rivendell. That journey
should not prove too perilous, though the Road is less easy than it
was, and it will grow worse as the year fails.’
‘Rivendell!’ said Frodo. ‘Very good: I will go east, and I will make
for Rivendell. I will take Sam to visit the Elves; he will be delighted.’
He spoke lightly; but his heart was moved suddenly with a desire to
see the house of Elrond Halfelven, and breathe the air of that deep
valley where many of the Fair Folk still dwelt in peace.
One summer’s evening an astonishing piece of news reached the
Ivy Bush and Green Dragon. Giants and other portents on the borders
of the Shire were forgotten for more important matters: Mr. Frodo
was selling Bag End, indeed he had already sold it – to the Sackville-
Bagginses!
‘For a nice bit, too,’ said some. ‘At a bargain price,’ said others,
‘and that’s more likely when Mistress Lobelia’s the buyer.’ (Otho
had died some years before, at the ripe but disappointed age of 102.)
Just why Mr. Frodo was selling his beautiful hole was even more
debatable than the price. A few held the theory – supported by the
nods and hints of Mr. Baggins himself – that Frodo’s money was
running out: he was going to leave Hobbiton and live in a quiet way
on the proceeds of the sale down in Buckland among his Brandybuck
relations. ‘As far from the Sackville-Bagginses as may be,’ some
added. But so ﬁrmly ﬁxed had the notion of the immeasurable wealth
of the Bagginses of Bag End become that most found this hard to
believe, harder than any other reason or unreason that their fancy
could suggest: to most it suggested a dark and yet unrevealed plot
by Gandalf. Though he kept himself very quiet and did not go about
by day, it was well known that he was ‘hiding up in the Bag End’.
But however a removal might ﬁt in with the designs of his wizardry,
there was no doubt about the fact: Frodo Baggins was going back to
Buckland.
‘Yes, I shall be moving this autumn,’ he said. ‘Merry Brandybuck
is looking out for a nice little hole for me, or perhaps a small house.’

As a matter of fact with Merry’s help he had already chosen
and bought a little house at Crickhollow in the country beyond
Bucklebury. To all but Sam he pretended he was going to settle down
there permanently. The decision to set out eastwards had suggested
the idea to him; for Buckland was on the eastern borders of the Shire,
and as he had lived there in childhood his going back would at least
seem credible.
Gandalf stayed in the Shire for over two months. Then one
evening, at the end of June, soon after Frodo’s plan had been ﬁnally
arranged, he suddenly announced that he was going off again next
morning. ‘Only for a short while, I hope,’ he said. ‘But I am going
down beyond the southern borders to get some news, if I can. I have
been idle longer than I should.’
He spoke lightly, but it seemed to Frodo that he looked rather
worried. ‘Has anything happened?’ he asked.
‘Well no; but I have heard something that has made me anxious
and needs looking into. If I think it necessary after all for you to get
off at once, I shall come back immediately, or at least send word. In
the meanwhile stick to your plan; but be more careful than ever,
especially of the Ring. Let me impress on you once more: don’t use
it! ’
He went off at dawn. ‘I may be back any day,’ he said. ‘At the
very latest I shall come back for the farewell party. I think after all
you may need my company on the Road.’
At ﬁrst Frodo was a good deal disturbed, and wondered often
what Gandalf could have heard; but his uneasiness wore off, and in
the ﬁne weather he forgot his troubles for a while. The Shire had
seldom seen so fair a summer, or so rich an autumn: the trees were
laden with apples, honey was dripping in the combs, and the corn
was tall and full.
Autumn was well under way before Frodo began to worry about
Gandalf again. September was passing and there was still no news
of him. The Birthday, and the removal, drew nearer, and still he did
not come, or send word. Bag End began to be busy. Some of Frodo’s
friends came to stay and help him with the packing: there was
Fredegar Bolger and Folco Bofﬁn, and of course his special friends
Pippin Took and Merry Brandybuck. Between them they turned the
whole place upside-down.
On September 20th two covered carts went off laden to Buckland,
conveying the furniture and goods that Frodo had not sold to his
new home, by way of the Brandywine Bridge.The next day Frodo
became really anxious, and kept a constant look-out for Gandalf.
Thursday, his birthday morning, dawned as fair and clear as it had

long ago for Bilbo’s great party. Still Gandalf did not appear. In the
evening Frodo gave his farewell feast: it was quite small, just a dinner
for himself and his four helpers; but he was troubled and felt in no
mood for it. The thought that he would so soon have to part with
his young friends weighed on his heart. He wondered how he would
break it to them.
The four younger hobbits were, however, in high spirits, and the
party soon became very cheerful in spite of Gandalf ’s absence. The
dining-room was bare except for a table and chairs, but the food was
good, and there was good wine: Frodo’s wine had not been included
in the sale to the Sackville-Bagginses.
‘Whatever happens to the rest of my stuff, when the S.-B.s get
their claws on it, at any rate I have found a good home for this!’ said
Frodo, as he drained his glass. It was the last drop of Old Winyards.
When they had sung many songs, and talked of many things
they had done together, they toasted Bilbo’s birthday, and they
drank his health and Frodo’s together according to Frodo’s custom.
Then they went out for a sniff of air, and glimpse of the stars, and
then they went to bed. Frodo’s party was over, and Gandalf had not
come.
The next morning they were busy packing another cart with the
remainder of the luggage. Merry took charge of this, and drove off
with Fatty (that is Fredegar Bolger). ‘Someone must get there and
warm the house before you arrive,’ said Merry. ‘Well, see you later
– the day after tomorrow, if you don’t go to sleep on the way!’
Folco went home after lunch, but Pippin remained behind. Frodo
was restless and anxious, listening in vain for a sound of Gandalf.
He decided to wait until nightfall. After that, if Gandalf wanted him
urgently, he would go to Crickhollow, and might even get there ﬁrst.
For Frodo was going on foot. His plan – for pleasure and a last look
at the Shire as much as any other reason – was to walk from Hobbiton
to Bucklebury Ferry, taking it fairly easy.
‘I shall get myself a bit into training, too,’ he said, looking at
himself in a dusty mirror in the half-empty hall. He had not done
any strenuous walking for a long time, and the reﬂection looked
rather ﬂabby, he thought.
After lunch, the Sackville-Bagginses, Lobelia and her sandy-haired
son, Lotho, turned up, much to Frodo’s annoyance. ‘Ours at last!’
said Lobelia, as she stepped inside. It was not polite; nor strictly true,
for the sale of Bag End did not take effect until midnight. But Lobelia
can perhaps be forgiven: she had been obliged to wait about seventy-
seven years longer for Bag End than she once hoped, and she was
now a hundred years old. Anyway, she had come to see that nothing

she had paid for had been carried off; and she wanted the keys. It
took a long while to satisfy her, as she had brought a complete inven-
tory with her and went right through it. In the end she departed with
Lotho and the spare key and the promise that the other key would
be left at the Gamgees’ in Bagshot Row. She snorted, and showed
plainly that she thought the Gamgees capable of plundering the hole
during the night. Frodo did not offer her any tea.
He took his own tea with Pippin and Sam Gamgee in the kitchen.
It had been ofﬁcially announced that Sam was coming to Buckland
‘to do for Mr. Frodo and look after his bit of garden’; an arrangement
that was approved by the Gaffer, though it did not console him for
the prospect of having Lobelia as a neighbour.
‘Our last meal at Bag End!’ said Frodo, pushing back his chair.
They left the washing up for Lobelia. Pippin and Sam strapped up
their three packs and piled them in the porch. Pippin went out for
a last stroll in the garden. Sam disappeared.
The sun went down. Bag End seemed sad and gloomy and dishev-
elled. Frodo wandered round the familiar rooms, and saw the light
of the sunset fade on the walls, and shadows creep out of the corners.
It grew slowly dark indoors. He went out and walked down to the
gate at the bottom of the path, and then on a short way down the
Hill Road. He half expected to see Gandalf come striding up through
the dusk.
The sky was clear and the stars were growing bright. ‘It’s going
to be a ﬁne night,’ he said aloud. ‘That’s good for a beginning. I feel
like walking. I can’t bear any more hanging about. I am going to
start, and Gandalf must follow me.’ He turned to go back, and then
stopped, for he heard voices, just round the corner by the end of
Bagshot Row. One voice was certainly the old Gaffer’s; the other was
strange, and somehow unpleasant. He could not make out what it
said, but he heard the Gaffer’s answers, which were rather shrill. The
old man seemed put out.
‘No, Mr. Baggins has gone away. Went this morning, and my Sam
went with him: anyway all his stuff went. Yes, sold out and gone, I
tell’ee. Why? Why’s none of my business, or yours. Where to? That
ain’t no secret. He’s moved to Bucklebury or some such place, away
down yonder. Yes it is – a tidy way. I’ve never been so far myself;
they’re queer folks in Buckland. No, I can’t give no message. Good
night to you!’
Footsteps went away down the Hill. Frodo wondered vaguely why
the fact that they did not come on up the Hill seemed a great relief.
‘I am sick of questions and curiosity about my doings, I suppose,’
he thought. ‘What an inquisitive lot they all are!’ He had half a mind

to go and ask the Gaffer who the inquirer was; but he thought better
(or worse) of it, and turned and walked quickly back to Bag End.
Pippin was sitting on his pack in the porch. Sam was not there.
Frodo stepped inside the dark door. ‘Sam!’ he called. ‘Sam! Time!’
‘Coming, sir!’ came the answer from far within, followed soon by
Sam himself, wiping his mouth. He had been saying farewell to the
beer-barrel in the cellar.
‘All aboard, Sam?’ said Frodo.
‘Yes, sir. I’ll last for a bit now, sir.’
Frodo shut and locked the round door, and gave the key to Sam.
‘Run down with this to your home, Sam!’ he said. ‘Then cut along
the Row and meet us as quick as you can at the gate in the lane
beyond the meadows. We are not going through the village tonight.
Too many ears pricking and eyes prying.’ Sam ran off at full speed.
‘Well, now we’re off at last!’ said Frodo. They shouldered their
packs and took up their sticks, and walked round the corner to the
west side of Bag End. ‘Good-bye!’ said Frodo, looking at the dark
blank windows. He waved his hand, and then turned and (following
Bilbo, if he had known it) hurried after Peregrin down the garden-
path. They jumped over the low place in the hedge at the bottom
and took to the ﬁelds, passing into the darkness like a rustle in the
grasses.
At the bottom of the Hill on its western side they came to the gate
opening on to a narrow lane. There they halted and adjusted the
straps of their packs. Presently Sam appeared, trotting quickly and
breathing hard; his heavy pack was hoisted high on his shoulders,
and he had put on his head a tall shapeless felt bag, which he called
a hat. In the gloom he looked very much like a dwarf.
‘I am sure you have given me all the heaviest stuff,’ said Frodo.
‘I pity snails, and all that carry their homes on their backs.’
‘I could take a lot more yet, sir. My packet is quite light,’ said
Sam stoutly and untruthfully.
‘No you don’t, Sam!’ said Pippin. ‘It is good for him. He’s got
nothing except what he ordered us to pack. He’s been slack lately,
and he’ll feel the weight less when he’s walked off some of his own.’
‘Be kind to a poor old hobbit!’ laughed Frodo. ‘I shall be as thin
as a willow-wand, I’m sure, before I get to Buckland. But I was
talking nonsense. I suspect you have taken more than your share,
Sam, and I shall look into it at our next packing.’ He picked up his
stick again. ‘Well, we all like walking in the dark,’ he said, ‘so let’s
put some miles behind us before bed.’
For a short way they followed the lane westwards. Then leaving
it they turned left and took quietly to the ﬁelds again. They went in

single ﬁle along hedgerows and the borders of coppices, and night
fell dark about them. In their dark cloaks they were as invisible as if
they all had magic rings. Since they were all hobbits, and were trying
to be silent, they made no noise that even hobbits would hear. Even
the wild things in the ﬁelds and woods hardly noticed their passing.
After some time they crossed the Water, west of Hobbiton, by a
narrow plank-bridge. The stream was there no more than a winding
black ribbon, bordered with leaning alder-trees. A mile or two further
south they hastily crossed the great road from the Brandywine Bridge;
they were now in the Tookland and bending south-eastwards they
made for the Green Hill Country. As they began to climb its ﬁrst
slopes they looked back and saw the lamps in Hobbiton far off twink-
ling in the gentle valley of the Water. Soon it disappeared in the folds
of the darkened land, and was followed by Bywater beside its grey
pool. When the light of the last farm was far behind, peeping among
the trees, Frodo turned and waved a hand in farewell.
‘I wonder if I shall ever look down into that valley again,’ he said
quietly.
When they had walked for about three hours they rested. The
night was clear, cool, and starry, but smoke-like wisps of mist were
creeping up the hill-sides from the streams and deep meadows. Thin-
clad birches, swaying in a light wind above their heads, made a black
net against the pale sky. They ate a very frugal supper (for hobbits),
and then went on again. Soon they struck a narrow road, that went
rolling up and down, fading grey into the darkness ahead: the road
to Woodhall, and Stock, and the Bucklebury Ferry. It climbed away
from the main road in the Water-valley, and wound over the skirts
of the Green Hills towards Woody End, a wild corner of the
Eastfarthing.
After a while they plunged into a deeply cloven track between tall
trees that rustled their dry leaves in the night. It was very dark. At
ﬁrst they talked, or hummed a tune softly together, being now far
away from inquisitive ears. Then they marched on in silence, and
Pippin began to lag behind. At last, as they began to climb a steep
slope, he stopped and yawned.
‘I am so sleepy,’ he said, ‘that soon I shall fall down on the road.
Are you going to sleep on your legs? It is nearly midnight.’
‘I thought you liked walking in the dark,’ said Frodo. ‘But there
is no great hurry. Merry expects us some time the day after tomorrow;
but that leaves us nearly two days more. We’ll halt at the ﬁrst likely
spot.’
‘The wind’s in the West,’ said Sam. ‘If we get to the other side
of this hill, we shall ﬁnd a spot that is sheltered and snug enough,
sir. There is a dry ﬁr-wood just ahead, if I remember rightly.’ Sam

knew the land well within twenty miles of Hobbiton, but that was
the limit of his geography.
Just over the top of the hill they came on the patch of ﬁr-wood.
Leaving the road they went into the deep resin-scented darkness of
the trees, and gathered dead sticks and cones to make a ﬁre. Soon
they had a merry crackle of ﬂame at the foot of a large ﬁr-tree and
they sat round it for a while, until they began to nod. Then, each in
an angle of the great tree’s roots, they curled up in their cloaks and
blankets, and were soon fast asleep. They set no watch; even Frodo
feared no danger yet, for they were still in the heart of the Shire. A
few creatures came and looked at them when the ﬁre had died away.
A fox passing through the wood on business of his own stopped
several minutes and sniffed.
‘Hobbits!’ he thought. ‘Well, what next? I have heard of strange
doings in this land, but I have seldom heard of a hobbit sleeping out
of doors under a tree. Three of them! There’s something mighty
queer behind this.’ He was quite right, but he never found out any
more about it.
The morning came, pale and clammy. Frodo woke up ﬁrst, and
found that a tree-root had made a hole in his back, and that his neck
was stiff. ‘Walking for pleasure! Why didn’t I drive?’ he thought, as
he usually did at the beginning of an expedition. ‘And all my beautiful
feather beds are sold to the Sackville-Bagginses! These tree-roots
would do them good.’ He stretched. ‘Wake up, hobbits!’ he cried.
‘It’s a beautiful morning.’
‘What’s beautiful about it?’ said Pippin, peering over the edge of
his blanket with one eye. ‘Sam! Get breakfast ready for half-past nine!
Have you got the bath-water hot?’
Sam jumped up, looking rather bleary. ‘No, sir, I haven’t, sir!’ he
said.
Frodo stripped the blankets from Pippin and rolled him over, and
then walked off to the edge of the wood. Away eastward the sun was
rising red out of the mists that lay thick on the world. Touched with
gold and red the autumn trees seemed to be sailing rootless in a
shadowy sea. A little below him to the left the road ran down steeply
into a hollow and disappeared.
When he returned Sam and Pippin had got a good ﬁre going.
‘Water!’ shouted Pippin. ‘Where’s the water?’
‘I don’t keep water in my pockets,’ said Frodo.
‘We thought you had gone to ﬁnd some,’ said Pippin, busy setting
out the food, and cups. ‘You had better go now.’
‘You can come too,’ said Frodo, ‘and bring all the water-bottles.’
There was a stream at the foot of the hill. They ﬁlled their bottles

and the small camping kettle at a little fall where the water fell a few
feet over an outcrop of grey stone. It was icy cold; and they spluttered
and puffed as they bathed their faces and hands.
When their breakfast was over, and their packs all trussed up again,
it was after ten o’clock, and the day was beginning to turn ﬁne and
hot. They went down the slope, and across the stream where it dived
under the road, and up the next slope, and up and down another
shoulder of the hills; and by that time their cloaks, blankets, water,
food, and other gear already seemed a heavy burden.
The day’s march promised to be warm and tiring work. After some
miles, however, the road ceased to roll up and down: it climbed to
the top of a steep bank in a weary zig-zagging sort of way, and then
prepared to go down for the last time. In front of them they saw the
lower lands dotted with small clumps of trees that melted away in
the distance to a brown woodland haze. They were looking across
the Woody End towards the Brandywine River. The road wound
away before them like a piece of string.
‘The road goes on for ever,’ said Pippin; ‘but I can’t without a
rest. It is high time for lunch.’ He sat down on the bank at the side
of the road and looked away east into the haze, beyond which lay
the River, and the end of the Shire in which he had spent all his life.
Sam stood by him. His round eyes were wide open – for he was
looking across lands he had never seen to a new horizon.
‘Do Elves live in those woods?’ he asked.
‘Not that I ever heard,’ said Pippin. Frodo was silent. He too was
gazing eastward along the road, as if he had never seen it before.
Suddenly he spoke, aloud but as if to himself, saying slowly:
The Road goes ever on and on
Down from the door where it began.
Now far ahead the Road has gone,
And I must follow, if I can,
Pursuing it with weary feet,
Until it joins some larger way,
Where many paths and errands meet.
And whither then? I cannot say.
‘That sounds like a bit of old Bilbo’s rhyming,’ said Pippin. ‘Or
is it one of your imitations? It does not sound altogether encouraging.’
‘I don’t know,’ said Frodo. ‘It came to me then, as if I was making
it up; but I may have heard it long ago. Certainly it reminds me very
much of Bilbo in the last years, before he went away. He used often
to say there was only one Road; that it was like a great river: its

springs were at every doorstep, and every path was its tributary. ‘‘It’s
a dangerous business, Frodo, going out of your door,’’ he used to
say. ‘‘You step into the Road, and if you don’t keep your feet, there
is no knowing where you might be swept off to. Do you realize that
this is the very path that goes through Mirkwood, and that if you let
it, it might take you to the Lonely Mountain or even further and to
worse places?’’ He used to say that on the path outside the front door
at Bag End, especially after he had been out for a long walk.’
‘Well, the Road won’t sweep me anywhere for an hour at least,’
said Pippin, unslinging his pack. The others followed his example,
putting their packs against the bank and their legs out into the road.
After a rest they had a good lunch, and then more rest.
The sun was beginning to get low and the light of afternoon was
on the land as they went down the hill. So far they had not met a
soul on the road. This way was not much used, being hardly ﬁt for
carts, and there was little trafﬁc to the Woody End. They had been
jogging along again for an hour or more when Sam stopped a moment
as if listening. They were now on level ground, and the road after
much winding lay straight ahead through grass-land sprinkled with
tall trees, outliers of the approaching woods.
‘I can hear a pony or a horse coming along the road behind,’ said
Sam.
They looked back, but the turn of the road prevented them from
seeing far. ‘I wonder if that is Gandalf coming after us,’ said Frodo;
but even as he said it, he had a feeling that it was not so, and a
sudden desire to hide from the view of the rider came over him.
‘It may not matter much,’ he said apologetically, ‘but I would
rather not be seen on the road – by anyone. I am sick of my doings
being noticed and discussed. And if it is Gandalf,’ he added as an
afterthought, ‘we can give him a little surprise, to pay him out for
being so late. Let’s get out of sight!’
The other two ran quickly to the left and down into a little hollow
not far from the road. There they lay ﬂat. Frodo hesitated for a
second: curiosity or some other feeling was struggling with his desire
to hide. The sound of hoofs drew nearer. Just in time he threw himself
down in a patch of long grass behind a tree that overshadowed the
road. Then he lifted his head and peered cautiously above one of the
great roots.
Round the corner came a black horse, no hobbit-pony but a full-
sized horse; and on it sat a large man, who seemed to crouch in the
saddle, wrapped in a great black cloak and hood, so that only his
boots in the high stirrups showed below; his face was shadowed and
invisible.

When it reached the tree and was level with Frodo the horse stopped.
The riding ﬁgure sat quite still with its head bowed, as if listening. From
inside the hood came a noise as of someone snifﬁng to catch an elusive
scent; the head turned from side to side of the road.
A sudden unreasoning fear of discovery laid hold of Frodo, and
he thought of his Ring. He hardly dared to breathe, and yet the desire
to get it out of his pocket became so strong that he began slowly to
move his hand. He felt that he had only to slip it on, and then he
would be safe. The advice of Gandalf seemed absurd. Bilbo had used
the Ring. ‘And I am still in the Shire,’ he thought, as his hand touched
the chain on which it hung. At that moment the rider sat up, and
shook the reins. The horse stepped forward, walking slowly at ﬁrst,
and then breaking into a quick trot.
Frodo crawled to the edge of the road and watched the rider, until
he dwindled into the distance. He could not be quite sure, but it
seemed to him that suddenly, before it passed out of sight, the horse
turned aside and went into the trees on the right.
‘Well, I call that very queer, and indeed disturbing,’ said Frodo
to himself, as he walked towards his companions. Pippin and Sam
had remained ﬂat in the grass, and had seen nothing; so Frodo
described the rider and his strange behaviour.
‘I can’t say why, but I felt certain he was looking or smelling for
me; and also I felt certain that I did not want him to discover me.
I’ve never seen or felt anything like it in the Shire before.’
‘But what has one of the Big People got to do with us?’ said Pippin.
‘And what is he doing in this part of the world?’
‘There are some Men about,’ said Frodo. ‘Down in the South-
farthing they have had trouble with Big People, I believe. But I have
never heard of anything like this rider. I wonder where he comes
from.’
‘Begging your pardon,’ put in Sam suddenly, ‘I know where he
comes from. It’s from Hobbiton that this here black rider comes,
unless there’s more than one. And I know where he’s going to.’
‘What do you mean?’ said Frodo sharply, looking at him in aston-
ishment. ‘Why didn’t you speak up before?’
‘I have only just remembered, sir. It was like this: when I got back
to our hole yesterday evening with the key, my dad, he says to me:
Hallo, Sam! he says. I thought you were away with Mr. Frodo this
morning. There’s been a strange customer asking for Mr. Baggins of Bag
End, and he’s only just gone. I’ve sent him on to Bucklebury. Not that I
liked the sound of him. He seemed mighty put out, when I told him Mr.
Baggins had left his old home for good. Hissed at me, he did. It gave me
quite a shudder. What sort of a fellow was he? says I to the Gaffer. I
don’t know, says he; but he wasn’t a hobbit. He was tall and black-like,

and he stooped over me. I reckon it was one of the Big Folk from foreign
parts. He spoke funny.
‘I couldn’t stay to hear more, sir, since you were waiting; and I
didn’t give much heed to it myself. The Gaffer is getting old, and
more than a bit blind, and it must have been near dark when this
fellow come up the Hill and found him taking the air at the end of
our Row. I hope he hasn’t done no harm, sir, nor me.’
‘The Gaffer can’t be blamed anyway,’ said Frodo. ‘As a matter of
fact I heard him talking to a stranger, who seemed to be inquiring
for me, and I nearly went and asked him who it was. I wish I had,
or you had told me about it before. I might have been more careful
on the road.’
‘Still, there may be no connexion between this rider and the
Gaffer’s stranger,’ said Pippin. ‘We left Hobbiton secretly enough,
and I don’t see how he could have followed us.’
‘What about the smelling, sir?’ said Sam. ‘And the Gaffer said he
was a black chap.’
‘I wish I had waited for Gandalf,’ Frodo muttered. ‘But perhaps
it would only have made matters worse.’
‘Then you know or guess something about this rider?’ said Pippin,
who had caught the muttered words.
‘I don’t know, and I would rather not guess,’ said Frodo.
‘All right, cousin Frodo! You can keep your secret for the present,
if you want to be mysterious. In the meanwhile what are we to do?
I should like a bite and a sup, but somehow I think we had better
move on from here. Your talk of snifﬁng riders with invisible noses
has unsettled me.’
‘Yes, I think we will move on now,’ said Frodo; ‘but not on the
road – in case that rider comes back, or another follows him. We
ought to do a good step more today. Buckland is still miles away.’
The shadows of the trees were long and thin on the grass, as they
started off again. They now kept a stone’s throw to the left of the
road, and kept out of sight of it as much as they could. But this
hindered them; for the grass was thick and tussocky, and the ground
uneven, and the trees began to draw together into thickets.
The sun had gone down red behind the hills at their backs, and
evening was coming on before they came back to the road at the end
of the long level over which it had run straight for some miles. At
that point it bent left and went down into the lowlands of the Yale
making for Stock; but a lane branched right, winding through a wood
of ancient oak-trees on its way to Woodhall. ‘That is the way for us,’
said Frodo.
Not far from the road-meeting they came on the huge hulk of a

tree: it was still alive and had leaves on the small branches that it
had put out round the broken stumps of its long-fallen limbs; but it
was hollow, and could be entered by a great crack on the side away
from the road. The hobbits crept inside, and sat there upon a ﬂoor
of old leaves and decayed wood. They rested and had a light meal,
talking quietly and listening from time to time.
Twilight was about them as they crept back to the lane. The West
wind was sighing in the branches. Leaves were whispering. Soon the
road began to fall gently but steadily into the dusk. A star came out
above the trees in the darkening East before them. They went abreast
and in step, to keep up their spirits. After a time, as the stars grew
thicker and brighter, the feeling of disquiet left them, and they no
longer listened for the sound of hoofs. They began to hum softly, as
hobbits have a way of doing as they walk along, especially when
they are drawing near to home at night. With most hobbits it is a
supper-song or a bed-song; but these hobbits hummed a walking-song
(though not, of course, without any mention of supper and bed).
Bilbo Baggins had made the words, to a tune that was as old as
the hills, and taught it to Frodo as they walked in the lanes of the
Water-valley and talked about Adventure.
Upon the hearth the ﬁre is red,
Beneath the roof there is a bed;
But not yet weary are our feet,
Still round the corner we may meet
A sudden tree or standing stone
That none have seen but we alone.
Tree and ﬂower and leaf and grass,
Let them pass! Let them pass!
Hill and water under sky,
Pass them by! Pass them by!
Still round the corner there may wait
A new road or a secret gate,
And though we pass them by today,
Tomorrow we may come this way
And take the hidden paths that run
Towards the Moon or to the Sun.
Apple, thorn, and nut and sloe,
Let them go! Let them go!
Sand and stone and pool and dell,
Fare you well! Fare you well!

Home is behind, the world ahead,
And there are many paths to tread
Through shadows to the edge of night,
Until the stars are all alight.
Then world behind and home ahead,
We’ll wander back to home and bed.
Mist and twilight, cloud and shade,
Away shall fade! Away shall fade!
Fire and lamp, and meat and bread,
And then to bed! And then to bed!
The song ended. ‘And now to bed! And now to bed!’ sang Pippin
in a high voice.
‘Hush!’ said Frodo. ‘I think I hear hoofs again.’
They stopped suddenly and stood as silent as tree-shadows, listen-
ing. There was a sound of hoofs in the lane, some way behind, but
coming slow and clear down the wind. Quickly and quietly they
slipped off the path, and ran into the deeper shade under the oak-
trees.
‘Don’t let us go too far!’ said Frodo. ‘I don’t want to be seen, but
I want to see if it is another Black Rider.’
‘Very well!’ said Pippin. ‘But don’t forget the snifﬁng!’
The hoofs drew nearer. They had no time to ﬁnd any hiding-place
better than the general darkness under the trees; Sam and Pippin
crouched behind a large tree-bole, while Frodo crept back a few yards
towards the lane. It showed grey and pale, a line of fading light
through the wood. Above it the stars were thick in the dim sky, but
there was no moon.
The sound of hoofs stopped. As Frodo watched he saw something
dark pass across the lighter space between two trees, and then halt.
It looked like the black shade of a horse led by a smaller black shadow.
The black shadow stood close to the point where they had left the
path, and it swayed from side to side. Frodo thought he heard the
sound of snufﬂing. The shadow bent to the ground, and then began
to crawl towards him.
Once more the desire to slip on the Ring came over Frodo; but
this time it was stronger than before. So strong that, almost before
he realized what he was doing, his hand was groping in his pocket.
But at that moment there came a sound like mingled song and laugh-
ter. Clear voices rose and fell in the starlit air. The black shadow
straightened up and retreated. It climbed on to the shadowy horse
and seemed to vanish across the lane into the darkness on the other
side. Frodo breathed again.
‘Elves!’ exclaimed Sam in a hoarse whisper. ‘Elves, sir!’ He would

have burst out of the trees and dashed off towards the voices, if they
had not pulled him back.
‘Yes, it is Elves,’ said Frodo. ‘One can meet them sometimes in
the Woody End. They don’t live in the Shire, but they wander into
it in spring and autumn, out of their own lands away beyond the
Tower Hills. I am thankful that they do! You did not see, but that
Black Rider stopped just here and was actually crawling towards us
when the song began. As soon as he heard the voices he slipped
away.’
‘What about the Elves?’ said Sam, too excited to trouble about
the rider. ‘Can’t we go and see them?’
‘Listen! They are coming this way,’ said Frodo. ‘We have only to
wait.’
The singing drew nearer. One clear voice rose now above the
others. It was singing in the fair elven-tongue, of which Frodo knew
only a little, and the others knew nothing. Yet the sound blending
with the melody seemed to shape itself in their thought into words
which they only partly understood. This was the song as Frodo heard
it:
Snow-white! Snow-white! O Lady clear!
O Queen beyond the Western Seas!
O Light to us that wander here
Amid the world of woven trees!
Gilthoniel! O Elbereth!
Clear are thy eyes and bright thy breath!
Snow-white! Snow-white! We sing to thee
In a far land beyond the Sea.
O stars that in the Sunless Year
With shining hand by her were sown,
In windy ﬁelds now bright and clear
We see your silver blossom blown!
O Elbereth! Gilthoniel!
We still remember, we who dwell
In this far land beneath the trees,
Thy starlight on the Western Seas.
The song ended. ‘These are High Elves! They spoke the name of
Elbereth!’ said Frodo in amazement. ‘Few of that fairest folk are ever
seen in the Shire. Not many now remain in Middle-earth, east of the
Great Sea. This is indeed a strange chance!’

The hobbits sat in shadow by the wayside. Before long the Elves
came down the lane towards the valley. They passed slowly, and the
hobbits could see the starlight glimmering on their hair and in their
eyes. They bore no lights, yet as they walked a shimmer, like the
light of the moon above the rim of the hills before it rises, seemed
to fall about their feet. They were now silent, and as the last Elf
passed he turned and looked towards the hobbits and laughed.
‘Hail, Frodo!’ he cried. ‘You are abroad late. Or are you perhaps
lost?’ Then he called aloud to the others, and all the company stopped
and gathered round.
‘This is indeed wonderful!’ they said. ‘Three hobbits in a wood at
night! We have not seen such a thing since Bilbo went away. What
is the meaning of it?’
‘The meaning of it, fair people,’ said Frodo, ‘is simply that we
seem to be going the same way as you are. I like walking under the
stars. But I would welcome your company.’
‘But we have no need of other company, and hobbits are so dull,’
they laughed. ‘And how do you know that we go the same way as
you, for you do not know whither we are going?’
‘And how do you know my name?’ asked Frodo in return.
‘We know many things,’ they said. ‘We have seen you often before
with Bilbo, though you may not have seen us.’
‘Who are you, and who is your lord?’ asked Frodo.
‘I am Gildor,’ answered their leader, the Elf who had ﬁrst hailed
him. ‘Gildor Inglorion of the House of Finrod. We are Exiles, and
most of our kindred have long ago departed and we too are now only
tarrying here a while, ere we return over the Great Sea. But some of
our kinsfolk dwell still in peace in Rivendell. Come now, Frodo, tell
us what you are doing? For we see that there is some shadow of fear
upon you.’
‘O Wise People!’ interrupted Pippin eagerly. ‘Tell us about the
Black Riders!’
‘Black Riders?’ they said in low voices. ‘Why do you ask about
Black Riders?’
‘Because two Black Riders have overtaken us today, or one has
done so twice,’ said Pippin; ‘only a little while ago he slipped away
as you drew near.’
The Elves did not answer at once, but spoke together softly in
their own tongue. At length Gildor turned to the hobbits. ‘We will
not speak of this here,’ he said. ‘We think you had best come now
with us. It is not our custom, but for this time we will take you on
our road, and you shall lodge with us tonight, if you will.’
‘O Fair Folk! This is good fortune beyond my hope,’ said Pippin.
Sam was speechless. ‘I thank you indeed, Gildor Inglorion,’ said

Frodo bowing. ‘Elen sı´la lu´menn’ omentielvo, a star shines on the hour
of our meeting,’ he added in the High-elven speech.
‘Be careful, friends!’ cried Gildor laughing. ‘Speak no secrets! Here
is a scholar in the Ancient Tongue. Bilbo was a good master. Hail,
Elf-friend!’ he said, bowing to Frodo. ‘Come now with your friends
and join our company! You had best walk in the middle so that you
may not stray. You may be weary before we halt.’
‘Why? Where are you going?’ asked Frodo.
‘For tonight we go to the woods on the hills above Woodhall. It
is some miles, but you shall have rest at the end of it, and it will
shorten your journey tomorrow.’
They now marched on again in silence, and passed like shadows
and faint lights: for Elves (even more than hobbits) could walk when
they wished without sound or footfall. Pippin soon began to feel
sleepy, and staggered once or twice; but each time a tall Elf at his
side put out his arm and saved him from a fall. Sam walked along
at Frodo’s side, as if in a dream, with an expression on his face half
of fear and half of astonished joy.
The woods on either side became denser; the trees were now
younger and thicker; and as the lane went lower, running down into a
fold of the hills, there were many deep brakes of hazel on the rising
slopes at either hand. At last the Elves turned aside from the path. A
green ride lay almost unseen through the thickets on the right; and this
they followed as it wound away back up the wooded slopes on to the
top of a shoulder of the hills that stood out into the lower land of the
river-valley. Suddenly they came out of the shadow of the trees, and
before them lay a wide space of grass, grey under the night. On three
sides the woods pressed upon it; but eastward the ground fell steeply
and the tops of the dark trees, growing at the bottom of the slope, were
below their feet. Beyond, the low lands lay dim and ﬂat under the stars.
Nearer at hand a few lights twinkled in the village of Woodhall.
The Elves sat on the grass and spoke together in soft voices; they
seemed to take no further notice of the hobbits. Frodo and his com-
panions wrapped themselves in cloaks and blankets, and drowsiness
stole over them. The night grew on, and the lights in the valley went
out. Pippin fell asleep, pillowed on a green hillock.
Away high in the East swung Remmirath, the Netted Stars, and
slowly above the mists red Borgil rose, glowing like a jewel of ﬁre.
Then by some shift of airs all the mist was drawn away like a veil,
and there leaned up, as he climbed over the rim of the world, the
Swordsman of the Sky, Menelvagor with his shining belt. The Elves
all burst into song. Suddenly under the trees a ﬁre sprang up with a
red light.

‘Come!’ the Elves called to the hobbits. ‘Come! Now is the time
for speech and merriment!’
Pippin sat up and rubbed his eyes. He shivered. ‘There is a ﬁre in
the hall, and food for hungry guests,’ said an Elf standing before him.
At the south end of the greensward there was an opening. There
the green ﬂoor ran on into the wood, and formed a wide space like
a hall, roofed by the boughs of trees. Their great trunks ran like
pillars down each side. In the middle there was a wood-ﬁre blazing,
and upon the tree-pillars torches with lights of gold and silver were
burning steadily. The Elves sat round the ﬁre upon the grass or upon
the sawn rings of old trunks. Some went to and fro bearing cups and
pouring drink; others brought food on heaped plates and dishes.
‘This is poor fare,’ they said to the hobbits; ‘for we are lodging in
the greenwood far from our halls. If ever you are our guests at home,
we will treat you better.’
‘It seems to me good enough for a birthday-party,’ said Frodo.
Pippin afterwards recalled little of either food or drink, for his
mind was ﬁlled with the light upon the elf-faces, and the sound of
voices so various and so beautiful that he felt in a waking dream. But
he remembered that there was bread, surpassing the savour of a fair
white loaf to one who is starving; and fruits sweet as wildberries and
richer than the tended fruits of gardens; he drained a cup that was
ﬁlled with a fragrant draught, cool as a clear fountain, golden as a
summer afternoon.
Sam could never describe in words, nor picture clearly to himself,
what he felt or thought that night, though it remained in his memory
as one of the chief events of his life. The nearest he ever got was to
say: ‘Well, sir, if I could grow apples like that, I would call myself a
gardener. But it was the singing that went to my heart, if you know
what I mean.’
Frodo sat, eating, drinking, and talking with delight; but his mind
was chieﬂy on the words spoken. He knew a little of the elf-speech
and listened eagerly. Now and again he spoke to those that served
him and thanked them in their own language. They smiled at him
and said laughing: ‘Here is a jewel among hobbits!’
After a while Pippin fell fast asleep, and was lifted up and borne
away to a bower under the trees; there he was laid upon a soft bed
and slept the rest of the night away. Sam refused to leave his master.
When Pippin had gone, he came and sat curled up at Frodo’s feet,
where at last he nodded and closed his eyes. Frodo remained long
awake, talking with Gildor.
They spoke of many things, old and new, and Frodo questioned
Gildor much about happenings in the wide world outside the Shire.

The tidings were mostly sad and ominous: of gathering darkness, the
wars of Men, and the ﬂight of the Elves. At last Frodo asked the
question that was nearest to his heart:
‘Tell me, Gildor, have you ever seen Bilbo since he left us?’
Gildor smiled. ‘Yes,’ he answered. ‘Twice. He said farewell to us
on this very spot. But I saw him once again, far from here.’ He would
say no more about Bilbo, and Frodo fell silent.
‘You do not ask me or tell me much that concerns yourself, Frodo,’
said Gildor. ‘But I already know a little, and I can read more in your
face and in the thought behind your questions. You are leaving the
Shire, and yet you doubt that you will ﬁnd what you seek, or accom-
plish what you intend, or that you will ever return. Is not that so?’
‘It is,’ said Frodo; ‘but I thought my going was a secret known
only to Gandalf and my faithful Sam.’ He looked down at Sam, who
was snoring gently.
‘The secret will not reach the Enemy from us,’ said Gildor.
‘The Enemy?’ said Frodo. ‘Then you know why I am leaving the
Shire?’
‘I do not know for what reason the Enemy is pursuing you,’
answered Gildor; ‘but I perceive that he is – strange indeed though
that seems to me. And I warn you that peril is now both before you
and behind you, and upon either side.’
‘You mean the Riders? I feared that they were servants of the
Enemy. What are the Black Riders?’
‘Has Gandalf told you nothing?’
‘Nothing about such creatures.’
‘Then I think it is not for me to say more – lest terror should keep
you from your journey. For it seems to me that you have set out only
just in time, if indeed you are in time. You must now make haste, and
neither stay nor turn back; for the Shire is no longer any protection to
you.’
‘I cannot imagine what information could be more terrifying than
your hints and warnings,’ exclaimed Frodo. ‘I knew that danger lay
ahead, of course; but I did not expect to meet it in our own Shire.
Can’t a hobbit walk from the Water to the River in peace?’
‘But it is not your own Shire,’ said Gildor. ‘Others dwelt here
before hobbits were; and others will dwell here again when hobbits are
no more. The wide world is all about you: you can fence yourselves in,
but you cannot for ever fence it out.’
‘I know – and yet it has always seemed so safe and familiar. What
can I do now? My plan was to leave the Shire secretly, and make my
way to Rivendell; but now my footsteps are dogged, before ever I get
to Buckland.’
‘I think you should still follow that plan,’ said Gildor. ‘I do not

think the Road will prove too hard for your courage. But if you desire
clearer counsel, you should ask Gandalf. I do not know the reason
for your ﬂight, and therefore I do not know by what means your
pursuers will assail you. These things Gandalf must know. I suppose
that you will see him before you leave the Shire?’
‘I hope so. But that is another thing that makes me anxious. I
have been expecting Gandalf for many days. He was to have come
to Hobbiton at the latest two nights ago; but he has never appeared.
Now I am wondering what can have happened. Should I wait for
him?’
Gildor was silent for a moment. ‘I do not like this news,’ he said
at last. ‘That Gandalf should be late, does not bode well. But it is
said: Do not meddle in the affairs of Wizards, for they are subtle and
quick to anger. The choice is yours: to go or wait.’
‘And it is also said,’ answered Frodo: ‘Go not to the Elves for counsel,
for they will say both no and yes.’
‘Is it indeed?’ laughed Gildor. ‘Elves seldom give unguarded
advice, for advice is a dangerous gift, even from the wise to the wise,
and all courses may run ill. But what would you? You have not told
me all concerning yourself; and how then shall I choose better than
you? But if you demand advice, I will for friendship’s sake give it. I
think you should now go at once, without delay; and if Gandalf does
not come before you set out, then I also advise this: do not go alone.
Take such friends as are trusty and willing. Now you should be
grateful, for I do not give this counsel gladly. The Elves have their
own labours and their own sorrows, and they are little concerned
with the ways of hobbits, or of any other creatures upon earth. Our
paths cross theirs seldom, by chance or purpose. In this meeting there
may be more than chance; but the purpose is not clear to me, and I
fear to say too much.’
‘I am deeply grateful,’ said Frodo; ‘but I wish you would tell me
plainly what the Black Riders are. If I take your advice I may not see
Gandalf for a long while, and I ought to know what is the danger
that pursues me.’
‘Is it not enough to know that they are servants of the Enemy?’
answered Gildor. ‘Flee them! Speak no words to them! They are
deadly. Ask no more of me! But my heart forbodes that, ere all is
ended, you, Frodo son of Drogo, will know more of these fell things
than Gildor Inglorion. May Elbereth protect you!’
‘But where shall I ﬁnd courage?’ asked Frodo. ‘That is what I
chieﬂy need.’
‘Courage is found in unlikely places,’ said Gildor. ‘Be of good
hope! Sleep now! In the morning we shall have gone; but we will
send our messages through the lands. The Wandering Companies

shall know of your journey, and those that have power for good shall
be on the watch. I name you Elf-friend; and may the stars shine upon
the end of your road! Seldom have we had such delight in strangers,
and it is fair to hear words of the Ancient Speech from the lips of
other wanderers in the world.’
Frodo felt sleep coming upon him, even as Gildor ﬁnished speak-
ing. ‘I will sleep now,’ he said; and the Elf led him to a bower beside
Pippin, and he threw himself upon a bed and fell at once into a
dreamless slumber.

Chapter 4
A  S H O R T  C U T  T O  M U S H R O O M S
In the morning Frodo woke refreshed. He was lying in a bower made
by a living tree with branches laced and drooping to the ground; his
bed was of fern and grass, deep and soft and strangely fragrant. The
sun was shining through the ﬂuttering leaves, which were still green
upon the tree. He jumped up and went out.
Sam was sitting on the grass near the edge of the wood. Pippin
was standing studying the sky and weather. There was no sign of the
Elves.
‘They have left us fruit and drink, and bread,’ said Pippin. ‘Come
and have your breakfast. The bread tastes almost as good as it did
last night. I did not want to leave you any, but Sam insisted.’
Frodo sat down beside Sam and began to eat. ‘What is the plan
for today?’ asked Pippin.
‘To walk to Bucklebury as quickly as possible,’ answered Frodo,
and gave his attention to the food.
‘Do you think we shall see anything of those Riders?’ asked Pippin
cheerfully. Under the morning sun the prospect of seeing a whole
troop of them did not seem very alarming to him.
‘Yes, probably,’ said Frodo, not liking the reminder. ‘But I hope
to get across the river without their seeing us.’
‘Did you ﬁnd out anything about them from Gildor?’
‘Not much – only hints and riddles,’ said Frodo evasively.
‘Did you ask about the snifﬁng?’
‘We didn’t discuss it,’ said Frodo with his mouth full.
‘You should have. I am sure it is very important.’
‘In that case I am sure Gildor would have refused to explain it,’ said
Frodo sharply. ‘And now leave me in peace for a bit! I don’t want to
answer a string of questions while I am eating. I want to think!’
‘Good heavens!’ said Pippin. ‘At breakfast?’ He walked away
towards the edge of the green.
From Frodo’s mind the bright morning – treacherously bright, he
thought – had not banished the fear of pursuit; and he pondered the
words of Gildor. The merry voice of Pippin came to him. He was
running on the green turf and singing.
‘No! I could not!’ he said to himself. ‘It is one thing to take my
young friends walking over the Shire with me, until we are hungry
and weary, and food and bed are sweet. To take them into exile,
where hunger and weariness may have no cure, is quite another –

even if they are willing to come. The inheritance is mine alone. I
don’t think I ought even to take Sam.’ He looked at Sam Gamgee,
and discovered that Sam was watching him.
‘Well, Sam!’ he said. ‘What about it? I am leaving the Shire as
soon as ever I can – in fact I have made up my mind now not even
to wait a day at Crickhollow, if it can be helped.’
‘Very good, sir!’
‘You still mean to come with me?’
‘I do.’
‘It is going to be very dangerous, Sam. It is already dangerous.
Most likely neither of us will come back.’
‘If you don’t come back, sir, then I shan’t, that’s certain,’ said
Sam. ‘Don’t you leave him! they said to me. Leave him! I said. I never
mean to. I am going with him, if he climbs to the Moon; and if any of
those Black Riders try to stop him, they’ll have Sam Gamgee to reckon
with, I said. They laughed.’
‘Who are they, and what are you talking about?’
‘The Elves, sir. We had some talk last night; and they seemed to
know you were going away, so I didn’t see the use of denying it.
Wonderful folk, Elves, sir! Wonderful!’
‘They are,’ said Frodo. ‘Do you like them still, now you have had
a closer view?’
‘They seem a bit above my likes and dislikes, so to speak,’ answered
Sam slowly. ‘It don’t seem to matter what I think about them. They
are quite different from what I expected – so old and young, and so
gay and sad, as it were.’
Frodo looked at Sam rather startled, half expecting to see some
outward sign of the odd change that seemed to have come over him.
It did not sound like the voice of the old Sam Gamgee that he thought
he knew. But it looked like the old Sam Gamgee sitting there, except
that his face was unusually thoughtful.
‘Do you feel any need to leave the Shire now – now that your wish
to see them has come true already?’ he asked.
‘Yes, sir. I don’t know how to say it, but after last night I feel
different. I seem to see ahead, in a kind of way. I know we are going
to take a very long road, into darkness; but I know I can’t turn back.
It isn’t to see Elves now, nor dragons, nor mountains, that I want –
I don’t rightly know what I want: but I have something to do before
the end, and it lies ahead, not in the Shire. I must see it through,
sir, if you understand me.’
‘I don’t altogether. But I understand that Gandalf chose me a
good companion. I am content. We will go together.’
Frodo ﬁnished his breakfast in silence. Then standing up he looked
over the land ahead, and called to Pippin.

‘All ready to start?’ he said as Pippin ran up. ‘We must be getting
off at once. We slept late; and there are a good many miles to go.’
‘You slept late, you mean,’ said Pippin. ‘I was up long before; and
we are only waiting for you to ﬁnish eating and thinking.’
‘I have ﬁnished both now. And I am going to make for Bucklebury
Ferry as quickly as possible. I am not going out of the way, back to
the road we left last night: I am going to cut straight across country
from here.’
‘Then you are going to ﬂy,’ said Pippin. ‘You won’t cut straight
on foot anywhere in this country.’
‘We can cut straighter than the road anyway,’ answered Frodo.
‘The Ferry is east from Woodhall; but the hard road curves away to
the left – you can see a bend of it away north over there. It goes
round the north end of the Marish so as to strike the causeway from
the Bridge above Stock. But that is miles out of the way. We could
save a quarter of the distance if we made a line for the Ferry from
where we stand.’
‘Short cuts make long delays,’ argued Pippin. ‘The country is rough
round here, and there are bogs and all kinds of difﬁculties down in
the Marish – I know the land in these parts. And if you are worrying
about Black Riders, I can’t see that it is any worse meeting them on
a road than in a wood or a ﬁeld.’
‘It is less easy to ﬁnd people in the woods and ﬁelds,’ answered
Frodo. ‘And if you are supposed to be on the road, there is some
chance that you will be looked for on the road and not off it.’
‘All right!’ said Pippin. ‘I will follow you into every bog and ditch.
But it is hard! I had counted on passing the Golden Perch at Stock
before sundown. The best beer in the Eastfarthing, or used to be: it
is a long time since I tasted it.’
‘That settles it!’ said Frodo. ‘Short cuts make delays, but inns
make longer ones. At all costs we must keep you away from the
Golden Perch. We want to get to Bucklebury before dark. What do
you say, Sam?’
‘I will go along with you, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam (in spite of private
misgivings and a deep regret for the best beer in the Eastfarthing).
‘Then if we are going to toil through bog and briar, let’s go now!’
said Pippin.
It was already nearly as hot as it had been the day before; but
clouds were beginning to come up from the West. It looked likely to
turn to rain. The hobbits scrambled down a steep green bank and
plunged into the thick trees below. Their course had been chosen to
leave Woodhall to their left, and to cut slanting through the woods
that clustered along the eastern side of the hills, until they reached

the ﬂats beyond. Then they could make straight for the Ferry over
country that was open, except for a few ditches and fences. Frodo
reckoned they had eighteen miles to go in a straight line.
He soon found that the thicket was closer and more tangled than
it had appeared. There were no paths in the undergrowth, and they
did not get on very fast. When they had struggled to the bottom of
the bank, they found a stream running down from the hills behind
in a deeply dug bed with steep slippery sides overhung with brambles.
Most inconveniently it cut across the line they had chosen. They
could not jump over it, nor indeed get across it at all without getting
wet, scratched, and muddy. They halted, wondering what to do.
‘First check!’ said Pippin, smiling grimly.
Sam Gamgee looked back. Through an opening in the trees he
caught a glimpse of the top of the green bank from which they had
climbed down.
‘Look!’ he said, clutching Frodo by the arm. They all looked, and
on the edge high above them they saw against the sky a horse standing.
Beside it stooped a black ﬁgure.
They at once gave up any idea of going back. Frodo led the way,
and plunged quickly into the thick bushes beside the stream. ‘Whew!’
he said to Pippin. ‘We were both right! The short cut has gone
crooked already; but we got under cover only just in time. You’ve
got sharp ears, Sam: can you hear anything coming?’
They stood still, almost holding their breath as they listened; but
there was no sound of pursuit. ‘I don’t fancy he would try bringing
his horse down that bank,’ said Sam. ‘But I guess he knows we came
down it. We had better be going on.’
Going on was not altogether easy. They had packs to carry, and
the bushes and brambles were reluctant to let them through. They
were cut off from the wind by the ridge behind, and the air was still
and stuffy. When they forced their way at last into more open ground,
they were hot and tired and very scratched, and they were also no
longer certain of the direction in which they were going. The banks
of the stream sank, as it reached the levels and became broader and
shallower, wandering off towards the Marish and the River.
‘Why, this is the Stock-brook!’ said Pippin. ‘If we are going to try
and get back on to our course, we must cross at once and bear right.’
They waded the stream, and hurried over a wide open space,
rush-grown and treeless, on the further side. Beyond that they came
again to a belt of trees: tall oaks, for the most part, with here and
there an elm tree or an ash. The ground was fairly level, and there
was little undergrowth; but the trees were too close for them to see
far ahead. The leaves blew upwards in sudden gusts of wind, and
spots of rain began to fall from the overcast sky. Then the wind died

away and the rain came streaming down. They trudged along as fast
as they could, over patches of grass, and through thick drifts of old
leaves; and all about them the rain pattered and trickled. They did
not talk, but kept glancing back, and from side to side.
After half an hour Pippin said: ‘I hope we have not turned too
much towards the south, and are not walking longwise through this
wood! It is not a very broad belt – I should have said no more than
a mile at the widest – and we ought to have been through it by now.’
‘It is no good our starting to go in zig-zags,’ said Frodo. ‘That
won’t mend matters. Let us keep on as we are going! I am not sure
that I want to come out into the open yet.’
They went on for perhaps another couple of miles. Then the sun
gleamed out of ragged clouds again and the rain lessened. It was now
past mid-day, and they felt it was high time for lunch. They halted
under an elm tree: its leaves though fast turning yellow were still
thick, and the ground at its feet was fairly dry and sheltered. When
they came to make their meal, they found that the Elves had ﬁlled
their bottles with a clear drink, pale golden in colour: it had the scent
of a honey made of many ﬂowers, and was wonderfully refreshing.
Very soon they were laughing, and snapping their ﬁngers at rain, and
at Black Riders. The last few miles, they felt, would soon be behind
them.
Frodo propped his back against the tree-trunk, and closed his eyes.
Sam and Pippin sat near, and they began to hum, and then to sing
softly:
Ho! Ho! Ho! to the bottle I go
To heal my heart and drown my woe.
Rain may fall and wind may blow,
And many miles be still to go,
But under a tall tree I will lie,
And let the clouds go sailing by.
Ho! Ho! Ho! they began again louder. They stopped short suddenly.
Frodo sprang to his feet. A long-drawn wail came down the wind,
like the cry of some evil and lonely creature. It rose and fell, and
ended on a high piercing note. Even as they sat and stood, as if
suddenly frozen, it was answered by another cry, fainter and further
off, but no less chilling to the blood. There was then a silence, broken
only by the sound of the wind in the leaves.
‘And what do you think that was?’ Pippin asked at last, trying to
speak lightly, but quavering a little. ‘If it was a bird, it was one that
I never heard in the Shire before.’

‘It was not bird or beast,’ said Frodo. ‘It was a call, or a signal –
there were words in that cry, though I could not catch them. But no
hobbit has such a voice.’
No more was said about it. They were all thinking of the Riders,
but no one spoke of them. They were now reluctant either to stay
or go on; but sooner or later they had got to get across the open
country to the Ferry, and it was best to go sooner and in daylight.
In a few moments they had shouldered their packs again and were
off.
Before long the wood came to a sudden end. Wide grass-lands
stretched before them. They now saw that they had, in fact, turned
too much to the south. Away over the ﬂats they could glimpse the
low hill of Bucklebury across the River, but it was now to their left.
Creeping cautiously out from the edge of the trees, they set off across
the open as quickly as they could.
At ﬁrst they felt afraid, away from the shelter of the wood. Far
back behind them stood the high place where they had breakfasted.
Frodo half expected to see the small distant ﬁgure of a horseman on
the ridge dark against the sky; but there was no sign of one. The sun
escaping from the breaking clouds, as it sank towards the hills they
had left, was now shining brightly again. Their fear left them, though
they still felt uneasy. But the land became steadily more tame and
well-ordered. Soon they came into well-tended ﬁelds and meadows:
there were hedges and gates and dikes for drainage. Everything
seemed quiet and peaceful, just an ordinary corner of the Shire. Their
spirits rose with every step. The line of the River grew nearer; and
the Black Riders began to seem like phantoms of the woods now left
far behind.
They passed along the edge of a huge turnip-ﬁeld, and came to a
stout gate. Beyond it a rutted lane ran between low well-laid hedges
towards a distant clump of trees. Pippin stopped.
‘I know these ﬁelds and this gate!’ he said. ‘This is Bamfurlong,
old Farmer Maggot’s land. That’s his farm away there in the trees.’
‘One trouble after another!’ said Frodo, looking nearly as much
alarmed as if Pippin had declared the lane was the slot leading to a
dragon’s den. The others looked at him in surprise.
‘What’s wrong with old Maggot?’ asked Pippin. ‘He’s a good friend
to all the Brandybucks. Of course he’s a terror to trespassers, and
keeps ferocious dogs – but after all, folk down here are near the
border and have to be more on their guard.’
‘I know,’ said Frodo. ‘But all the same,’ he added with a shame-
faced laugh, ‘I am terriﬁed of him and his dogs. I have avoided his
farm for years and years. He caught me several times trespassing after

mushrooms, when I was a youngster at Brandy Hall. On the last
occasion he beat me, and then took me and showed me to his dogs.
‘‘See, lads,’’ he said, ‘‘next time this young varmint sets foot on my
land, you can eat him. Now see him off !’’ They chased me all the
way to the Ferry. I have never got over the fright – though I daresay
the beasts knew their business and would not really have touched
me.’
Pippin laughed. ‘Well, it’s time you made it up. Especially if you
are coming back to live in Buckland. Old Maggot is really a stout
fellow – if you leave his mushrooms alone. Let’s get into the lane
and then we shan’t be trespassing. If we meet him, I’ll do the talking.
He is a friend of Merry’s, and I used to come here with him a good
deal at one time.’
They went along the lane, until they saw the thatched roofs of a
large house and farm-buildings peeping out among the trees ahead.
The Maggots, and the Puddifoots of Stock, and most of the inhabi-
tants of the Marish, were house-dwellers; and this farm was stoutly
built of brick and had a high wall all round it. There was a wide
wooden gate opening out of the wall into the lane.
Suddenly as they drew nearer a terriﬁc baying and barking broke
out, and a loud voice was heard shouting: ‘Grip! Fang! Wolf ! Come
on, lads!’
Frodo and Sam stopped dead, but Pippin walked on a few paces.
The gate opened and three huge dogs came pelting out into the lane,
and dashed towards the travellers, barking ﬁercely. They took no
notice of Pippin; but Sam shrank against the wall, while two wolvish-
looking dogs sniffed at him suspiciously, and snarled if he moved.
The largest and most ferocious of the three halted in front of Frodo,
bristling and growling.
Through the gate there now appeared a broad thick-set hobbit
with a round red face. ‘Hallo! Hallo! And who may you be, and what
may you be wanting?’ he asked.
‘Good afternoon, Mr. Maggot!’ said Pippin.
The farmer looked at him closely. ‘Well, if it isn’t Master Pippin
– Mr. Peregrin Took, I should say!’ he cried, changing from a scowl
to a grin. ‘It’s a long time since I saw you round here. It’s lucky for
you that I know you. I was just going out to set my dogs on any
strangers. There are some funny things going on today. Of course,
we do get queer folk wandering in these parts at times. Too near
the River,’ he said, shaking his head. ‘But this fellow was the most
outlandish I have ever set eyes on. He won’t cross my land without
leave a second time, not if I can stop it.’
‘What fellow do you mean?’ asked Pippin.

‘Then you haven’t seen him?’ said the farmer. ‘He went up the
lane towards the causeway not a long while back. He was a funny
customer and asking funny questions. But perhaps you’ll come along
inside, and we’ll pass the news more comfortable. I’ve a drop of good
ale on tap, if you and your friends are willing, Mr. Took.’
It seemed plain that the farmer would tell them more, if allowed
to do it in his own time and fashion, so they all accepted the invitation.
‘What about the dogs?’ asked Frodo anxiously.
The farmer laughed. ‘They won’t harm you – not unless I tell ’em
to. Here, Grip! Fang! Heel!’ he cried. ‘Heel, Wolf !’ To the relief of
Frodo and Sam, the dogs walked away and let them go free.
Pippin introduced the other two to the farmer. ‘Mr. Frodo Baggins,’
he said. ‘You may not remember him, but he used to live at Brandy
Hall.’ At the name Baggins the farmer started, and gave Frodo a
sharp glance. For a moment Frodo thought that the memory of stolen
mushrooms had been aroused, and that the dogs would be told to
see him off. But Farmer Maggot took him by the arm.
‘Well, if that isn’t queerer than ever!’ he exclaimed. ‘Mr. Baggins
is it? Come inside! We must have a talk.’
They went into the farmer’s kitchen, and sat by the wide ﬁre-place.
Mrs. Maggot brought out beer in a huge jug, and ﬁlled four large
mugs. It was a good brew, and Pippin found himself more than
compensated for missing the Golden Perch. Sam sipped his beer sus-
piciously. He had a natural mistrust of the inhabitants of other parts
of the Shire; and also he was not disposed to be quick friends with
anyone who had beaten his master, however long ago.
After a few remarks about the weather and the agricultural pros-
pects (which were no worse than usual), Farmer Maggot put down
his mug and looked at them all in turn.
‘Now, Mr. Peregrin,’ he said, ‘where might you be coming from,
and where might you be going to? Were you coming to visit me? For,
if so, you had gone past my gate without my seeing you.’
‘Well, no,’ answered Pippin. ‘To tell you the truth, since you have
guessed it, we got into the lane from the other end: we had come
over your ﬁelds. But that was quite by accident. We lost our way in
the woods, back near Woodhall, trying to take a short cut to the
Ferry.’
‘If you were in a hurry, the road would have served you better,’
said the farmer. ‘But I wasn’t worrying about that. You have leave
to walk over my land, if you have a mind, Mr. Peregrin. And you,
Mr. Baggins – though I daresay you still like mushrooms.’ He laughed.
‘Ah yes, I recognized the name. I recollect the time when young
Frodo Baggins was one of the worst young rascals of Buckland. But
it wasn’t mushrooms I was thinking of. I had just heard the name

Baggins before you turned up. What do you think that funny customer
asked me?’
They waited anxiously for him to go on. ‘Well,’ the farmer con-
tinued, approaching his point with slow relish, ‘he came riding on a
big black horse in at the gate, which happened to be open, and right
up to my door. All black he was himself, too, and cloaked and hooded
up, as if he did not want to be known. ‘‘Now what in the Shire can
he want?’’ I thought to myself. We don’t see many of the Big Folk
over the border; and anyway I had never heard of any like this black
fellow.
‘ ‘‘Good-day to you!’’ I says, going out to him. ‘‘This lane don’t
lead anywhere, and wherever you may be going, your quickest way
will be back to the road.’’ I didn’t like the looks of him; and when
Grip came out, he took one sniff and let out a yelp as if he had been
stung: he put down his tail and bolted off howling. The black fellow
sat quite still.
‘ ‘‘I come from yonder,’’ he said, slow and stiff-like, pointing back
west, over my ﬁelds, if you please. ‘‘Have you seen Baggins?’’ he
asked in a queer voice, and bent down towards me. I could not see
any face, for his hood fell down so low; and I felt a sort of shiver
down my back. But I did not see why he should come riding over
my land so bold.
‘ ‘‘Be off !’’ I said. ‘‘There are no Bagginses here. You’re in the
wrong part of the Shire. You had better go back west to Hobbiton
– but you can go by road this time.’’
‘ ‘‘Baggins has left,’’ he answered in a whisper. ‘‘He is coming. He
is not far away. I wish to ﬁnd him. If he passes will you tell me? I
will come back with gold.’’
‘ ‘‘No you won’t,’’ I said. ‘‘You’ll go back where you belong,
double quick. I give you one minute before I call all my dogs.’’
‘He gave a sort of hiss. It might have been laughing, and it might
not. Then he spurred his great horse right at me, and I jumped out
of the way only just in time. I called the dogs, but he swung off, and
rode through the gate and up the lane towards the causeway like a
bolt of thunder. What do you think of that?’
Frodo sat for a moment looking at the ﬁre, but his only thought
was how on earth would they reach the Ferry. ‘I don’t know what
to think,’ he said at last.
‘Then I’ll tell you what to think,’ said Maggot. ‘You should never
have gone mixing yourself up with Hobbiton folk, Mr. Frodo. Folk
are queer up there.’ Sam stirred in his chair, and looked at the farmer
with an unfriendly eye. ‘But you were always a reckless lad. When I
heard you had left the Brandybucks and gone off to that old Mr.
Bilbo, I said that you were going to ﬁnd trouble. Mark my words,

this all comes of those strange doings of Mr. Bilbo’s. His money was
got in some strange fashion in foreign parts, they say. Maybe there
is some that want to know what has become of the gold and jewels
that he buried in the hill of Hobbiton, as I hear?’
Frodo said nothing: the shrewd guesses of the farmer were rather
disconcerting.
‘Well, Mr. Frodo,’ Maggot went on, ‘I’m glad that you’ve had the
sense to come back to Buckland. My advice is: stay there! And don’t
get mixed up with these outlandish folk. You’ll have friends in these
parts. If any of these black fellows come after you again, I’ll deal
with them. I’ll say you’re dead, or have left the Shire, or anything
you like. And that might be true enough; for as like as not it is old
Mr. Bilbo they want news of.’
‘Maybe you’re right,’ said Frodo, avoiding the farmer’s eye and
staring at the ﬁre.
Maggot looked at him thoughtfully. ‘Well, I see you have ideas of
your own,’ he said. ‘It is as plain as my nose that no accident brought
you and that rider here on the same afternoon; and maybe my news
was no great news to you, after all. I am not asking you to tell me
anything you have a mind to keep to yourself; but I see you are in
some kind of trouble. Perhaps you are thinking it won’t be too easy
to get to the Ferry without being caught?’
‘I was thinking so,’ said Frodo. ‘But we have got to try and get
there; and it won’t be done by sitting and thinking. So I am afraid
we must be going. Thank you very much indeed for your kindness!
I’ve been in terror of you and your dogs for over thirty years, Farmer
Maggot, though you may laugh to hear it. It’s a pity: for I’ve missed
a good friend. And now I’m sorry to leave so soon. But I’ll come
back, perhaps, one day – if I get a chance.’
‘You’ll be welcome when you come,’ said Maggot. ‘But now I’ve
a notion. It’s near sundown already, and we are going to have our
supper; for we mostly go to bed soon after the Sun. If you and Mr.
Peregrin and all could stay and have a bite with us, we would be
pleased!’
‘And so should we!’ said Frodo. ‘But we must be going at once,
I’m afraid. Even now it will be dark before we can reach the Ferry.’
‘Ah! but wait a minute! I was going to say: after a bit of supper,
I’ll get out a small waggon, and I’ll drive you all to the Ferry. That
will save you a good step, and it might also save you trouble of
another sort.’
Frodo now accepted the invitation gratefully, to the relief of Pippin
and Sam. The sun was already behind the western hills, and the light
was failing. Two of Maggot’s sons and his three daughters came in,
and a generous supper was laid on the large table. The kitchen was

lit with candles and the ﬁre was mended. Mrs. Maggot bustled in
and out. One or two other hobbits belonging to the farm-household
came in. In a short while fourteen sat down to eat. There was beer
in plenty, and a mighty dish of mushrooms and bacon, besides much
other solid farmhouse fare. The dogs lay by the ﬁre and gnawed rinds
and cracked bones.
When they had ﬁnished, the farmer and his sons went out with a
lantern and got the waggon ready. It was dark in the yard, when the
guests came out. They threw their packs on board and climbed in.
The farmer sat in the driving-seat, and whipped up his two stout
ponies. His wife stood in the light of the open door.
‘You be careful of yourself, Maggot!’ she called. ‘Don’t go arguing
with any foreigners, and come straight back!’
‘I will!’ said he, and drove out of the gate. There was now no
breath of wind stirring; the night was still and quiet, and a chill was
in the air. They went without lights and took it slowly. After a mile
or two the lane came to an end, crossing a deep dike, and climbing
a short slope up on to the high-banked causeway.
Maggot got down and took a good look either way, north and
south, but nothing could be seen in the darkness, and there was not
a sound in the still air. Thin strands of river-mist were hanging above
the dikes, and crawling over the ﬁelds.
‘It’s going to be thick,’ said Maggot; ‘but I’ll not light my lanterns
till I turn for home. We’ll hear anything on the road long before we
meet it tonight.’
It was ﬁve miles or more from Maggot’s lane to the Ferry. The
hobbits wrapped themselves up, but their ears were strained for any
sound above the creak of the wheels and the slow clop of the ponies’
hoofs. The waggon seemed slower than a snail to Frodo. Beside him
Pippin was nodding towards sleep; but Sam was staring forwards
into the rising fog.
They reached the entrance to the Ferry lane at last. It was marked
by two tall white posts that suddenly loomed up on their right. Farmer
Maggot drew in his ponies and the waggon creaked to a halt. They
were just beginning to scramble out, when suddenly they heard what
they had all been dreading: hoofs on the road ahead. The sound was
coming towards them.
Maggot jumped down and stood holding the ponies’ heads, and
peering forward into the gloom. Clip-clop, clip-clop came the approach-
ing rider. The fall of the hoofs sounded loud in the still, foggy air.
‘You’d better be hidden, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam anxiously. ‘You
get down in the waggon and cover up with blankets, and we’ll send
this rider to the rightabouts!’ He climbed out and went to the farmer’s

side. Black Riders would have to ride over him to get near the waggon.
Clop-clop, clop-clop. The rider was nearly on them.
‘Hallo there!’ called Farmer Maggot. The advancing hoofs stopped
short. They thought they could dimly guess a dark cloaked shape in
the mist, a yard or two ahead.
‘Now then!’ said the farmer, throwing the reins to Sam and striding
forward. ‘Don’t you come a step nearer! What do you want, and
where are you going?’
‘I want Mr. Baggins. Have you seen him?’ said a mufﬂed voice –
but the voice was the voice of Merry Brandybuck. A dark lantern
was uncovered, and its light fell on the astonished face of the farmer.
‘Mr. Merry!’ he cried.
‘Yes, of course! Who did you think it was?’ said Merry coming
forward. As he came out of the mist and their fears subsided, he
seemed suddenly to diminish to ordinary hobbit-size. He was riding
a pony, and a scarf was swathed round his neck and over his chin to
keep out the fog.
Frodo sprang out of the waggon to greet him. ‘So there you are
at last!’ said Merry. ‘I was beginning to wonder if you would turn
up at all today, and I was just going back to supper. When it grew
foggy I came across and rode up towards Stock to see if you had
fallen in any ditches. But I’m blest if I know which way you have
come. Where did you ﬁnd them, Mr. Maggot? In your duck-pond?’
‘No, I caught ’em trespassing,’ said the farmer, ‘and nearly set my
dogs on ’em; but they’ll tell you all the story, I’ve no doubt. Now,
if you’ll excuse me, Mr. Merry and Mr. Frodo and all, I’d best be
turning for home. Mrs. Maggot will be worriting with the night
getting thick.’
He backed the waggon into the lane and turned it. ‘Well, good
night to you all,’ he said. ‘It’s been a queer day, and no mistake. But
all’s well as ends well; though perhaps we should not say that until
we reach our own doors. I’ll not deny that I’ll be glad now when I
do.’ He lit his lanterns, and got up. Suddenly he produced a large
basket from under the seat. ‘I was nearly forgetting,’ he said. ‘Mrs.
Maggot put this up for Mr. Baggins, with her compliments.’ He
handed it down and moved off, followed by a chorus of thanks and
good-nights.
They watched the pale rings of light round his lanterns as they
dwindled into the foggy night. Suddenly Frodo laughed: from the
covered basket he held, the scent of mushrooms was rising.

Chapter 5
A  C O N S P I R A C Y  U N M A S K E D
‘Now we had better get home ourselves,’ said Merry. ‘There’s some-
thing funny about all this, I see; but it must wait till we get in.’
They turned down the Ferry lane, which was straight and well-kept
and edged with large white-washed stones. In a hundred yards or so
it brought them to the river-bank, where there was a broad wooden
landing-stage. A large ﬂat ferry-boat was moored beside it. The white
bollards near the water’s edge glimmered in the light of two lamps
on high posts. Behind them the mists in the ﬂat ﬁelds were now
above the hedges; but the water before them was dark, with only a
few curling wisps like steam among the reeds by the bank. There
seemed to be less fog on the further side.
Merry led the pony over a gangway on to the ferry, and the others
followed. Merry then pushed slowly off with a long pole. The Brandy-
wine ﬂowed slow and broad before them. On the other side the bank
was steep, and up it a winding path climbed from the further landing.
Lamps were twinkling there. Behind loomed up the Buck Hill; and
out of it, through stray shrouds of mist, shone many round windows,
yellow and red. They were the windows of Brandy Hall, the ancient
home of the Brandybucks.
Long ago Gorhendad Oldbuck, head of the Oldbuck family, one
of the oldest in the Marish or indeed in the Shire, had crossed the
river, which was the original boundary of the land eastwards. He
built (and excavated) Brandy Hall, changed his name to Brandybuck,
and settled down to become master of what was virtually a small
independent country. His family grew and grew, and after his days
continued to grow, until Brandy Hall occupied the whole of the low
hill, and had three large front-doors, many side-doors, and about a
hundred windows. The Brandybucks and their numerous dependants
then began to burrow, and later to build, all round about. That was
the origin of Buckland, a thickly inhabited strip between the river
and the Old Forest, a sort of colony from the Shire. Its chief village
was Bucklebury, clustering in the banks and slopes behind Brandy
Hall.
The people in the Marish were friendly with the Bucklanders, and
the authority of the Master of the Hall (as the head of the Brandybuck
family was called) was still acknowledged by the farmers between
Stock and Rushey. But most of the folk of the old Shire regarded

the Bucklanders as peculiar, half foreigners as it were. Though, as a
matter of fact, they were not very different from the other hobbits of
the Four Farthings. Except in one point: they were fond of boats,
and some of them could swim.
Their land was originally unprotected from the East; but on that
side they had built a hedge: the High Hay. It had been planted many
generations ago, and was now thick and tall, for it was constantly
tended. It ran all the way from Brandywine Bridge, in a big loop
curving away from the river, to Haysend (where the Withywindle
ﬂowed out of the Forest into the Brandywine): well over twenty miles
from end to end. But, of course, it was not a complete protection.
The Forest drew close to the hedge in many places. The Bucklanders
kept their doors locked after dark, and that also was not usual in the
Shire.
The ferry-boat moved slowly across the water. The Buckland shore
drew nearer. Sam was the only member of the party who had not
been over the river before. He had a strange feeling as the slow
gurgling stream slipped by: his old life lay behind in the mists, dark
adventure lay in front. He scratched his head, and for a moment had
a passing wish that Mr. Frodo could have gone on living quietly at
Bag End.
The four hobbits stepped off the ferry. Merry was tying it up, and
Pippin was already leading the pony up the path, when Sam (who
had been looking back, as if to take farewell of the Shire) said in a
hoarse whisper:
‘Look back, Mr. Frodo! Do you see anything?’
On the far stage, under the distant lamps, they could just make
out a ﬁgure: it looked like a dark black bundle left behind. But as
they looked it seemed to move and sway this way and that, as if
searching the ground. It then crawled, or went crouching, back into
the gloom beyond the lamps.
‘What in the Shire is that?’ exclaimed Merry.
‘Something that is following us,’ said Frodo. ‘But don’t ask any
more now! Let’s get away at once!’ They hurried up the path to the
top of the bank, but when they looked back the far shore was shrouded
in mist, and nothing could be seen.
‘Thank goodness you don’t keep any boats on the west-bank!’ said
Frodo. ‘Can horses cross the river?’
‘They can go ten miles north to Brandywine Bridge – or they
might swim,’ answered Merry. ‘Though I never heard of any horse
swimming the Brandywine. But what have horses to do with it?’
‘I’ll tell you later. Let’s get indoors and then we can talk.’
‘All right! You and Pippin know your way; so I’ll just ride on and

tell Fatty Bolger that you are coming. We’ll see about supper and
things.’
‘We had our supper early with Farmer Maggot,’ said Frodo; ‘but
we could do with another.’
‘You shall have it! Give me that basket!’ said Merry, and rode
ahead into the darkness.
It was some distance from the Brandywine to Frodo’s new house
at Crickhollow. They passed Buck Hill and Brandy Hall on their left,
and on the outskirts of Bucklebury struck the main road of Buckland
that ran south from the Bridge. Half a mile northward along this they
came to a lane opening on their right. This they followed for a couple
of miles as it climbed up and down into the country.
At last they came to a narrow gate in a thick hedge. Nothing could
be seen of the house in the dark: it stood back from the lane in the
middle of a wide circle of lawn surrounded by a belt of low trees
inside the outer hedge. Frodo had chosen it, because it stood in an
out-of-the-way corner of the country, and there were no other dwell-
ings close by. You could get in and out without being noticed. It had
been built a long while before by the Brandybucks, for the use of
guests, or members of the family that wished to escape from the
crowded life of Brandy Hall for a time. It was an old-fashioned
countriﬁed house, as much like a hobbit-hole as possible: it was long
and low, with no upper storey; and it had a roof of turf, round
windows, and a large round door.
As they walked up the green path from the gate no light was visible;
the windows were dark and shuttered. Frodo knocked on the door,
and Fatty Bolger opened it. A friendly light streamed out. They
slipped in quickly and shut themselves and the light inside. They
were in a wide hall with doors on either side; in front of them a
passage ran back down the middle of the house.
‘Well, what do you think of it?’ asked Merry coming up the passage.
‘We have done our best in a short time to make it look like home. After
all Fatty and I only got here with the last cart-load yesterday.’
Frodo looked round. It did look like home. Many of his own
favourite things – or Bilbo’s things (they reminded him sharply of
him in their new setting) – were arranged as nearly as possible as
they had been at Bag End. It was a pleasant, comfortable, welcoming
place; and he found himself wishing that he was really coming here
to settle down in quiet retirement. It seemed unfair to have put his
friends to all this trouble; and he wondered again how he was going
to break the news to them that he must leave them so soon, indeed
at once. Yet that would have to be done that very night, before they
all went to bed.

‘It’s delightful!’ he said with an effort. ‘I hardly feel that I have
moved at all.’
The travellers hung up their cloaks, and piled their packs on the
ﬂoor. Merry led them down the passage and threw open a door at
the far end. Firelight came out, and a puff of steam.
‘A bath!’ cried Pippin. ‘O blessed Meriadoc!’
‘Which order shall we go in?’ said Frodo. ‘Eldest ﬁrst, or quickest
ﬁrst? You’ll be last either way, Master Peregrin.’
‘Trust me to arrange things better than that!’ said Merry. ‘We
can’t begin life at Crickhollow with a quarrel over baths. In that room
there are three tubs, and a copper full of boiling water. There are also
towels, mats and soap. Get inside, and be quick!’
Merry and Fatty went into the kitchen on the other side of the
passage, and busied themselves with the ﬁnal preparations for a late
supper. Snatches of competing songs came from the bathroom mixed
with the sound of splashing and wallowing. The voice of Pippin
was suddenly lifted up above the others in one of Bilbo’s favourite
bath-songs.
Sing hey! for the bath at close of day
that washes the weary mud away!
A loon is he that will not sing:
O! Water Hot is a noble thing!
O! Sweet is the sound of falling rain,
and the brook that leaps from hill to plain;
but better than rain or rippling streams
is Water Hot that smokes and steams.
O! Water cold we may pour at need
down a thirsty throat and be glad indeed;
but better is Beer, if drink we lack,
and Water Hot poured down the back.
O! Water is fair that leaps on high
in a fountain white beneath the sky;
but never did fountain sound so sweet
as splashing Hot Water with my feet!
There was a terriﬁc splash, and a shout of Whoa! from Frodo. It
appeared that a lot of Pippin’s bath had imitated a fountain and
leaped on high.

Merry went to the door: ‘What about supper and beer in the
throat?’ he called. Frodo came out drying his hair.
‘There’s so much water in the air that I’m coming into the kitchen
to ﬁnish,’ he said.
‘Lawks!’ said Merry, looking in. The stone ﬂoor was swimming.
‘You ought to mop all that up before you get anything to eat, Peregrin,’
he said. ‘Hurry up, or we shan’t wait for you.’
They had supper in the kitchen on a table near the ﬁre. ‘I suppose
you three won’t want mushrooms again?’ said Fredegar without much
hope.
‘Yes we shall!’ cried Pippin.
‘They’re mine!’ said Frodo. ‘Given to me by Mrs. Maggot, a queen
among farmers’ wives. Take your greedy hands away, and I’ll serve
them.’
Hobbits have a passion for mushrooms, surpassing even the
greediest likings of Big People. A fact which partly explains young
Frodo’s long expeditions to the renowned ﬁelds of the Marish, and
the wrath of the injured Maggot. On this occasion there was plenty
for all, even according to hobbit standards. There were also many
other things to follow, and when they had ﬁnished even Fatty Bolger
heaved a sigh of content. They pushed back the table, and drew
chairs round the ﬁre.
‘We’ll clear up later,’ said Merry. ‘Now tell me all about it! I
guess that you have been having adventures, which was not quite fair
without me. I want a full account; and most of all I want to know
what was the matter with old Maggot, and why he spoke to me like
that. He sounded almost as if he was scared, if that is possible.’
‘We have all been scared,’ said Pippin after a pause, in which
Frodo stared at the ﬁre and did not speak. ‘You would have been,
too, if you had been chased for two days by Black Riders.’
‘And what are they?’
‘Black ﬁgures riding on black horses,’ answered Pippin. ‘If Frodo
won’t talk, I will tell you the whole tale from the beginning.’ He then
gave a full account of their journey from the time when they left
Hobbiton. Sam gave various supporting nods and exclamations.
Frodo remained silent.
‘I should think you were making it all up,’ said Merry, ‘if I had
not seen that black shape on the landing-stage – and heard the queer
sound in Maggot’s voice. What do you make of it all, Frodo?’
‘Cousin Frodo has been very close,’ said Pippin. ‘But the time has
come for him to open out. So far we have been given nothing more
to go on than Farmer Maggot’s guess that it has something to do
with old Bilbo’s treasure.’

‘That was only a guess,’ said Frodo hastily. ‘Maggot does not know
anything.’
‘Old Maggot is a shrewd fellow,’ said Merry. ‘A lot goes on behind
his round face that does not come out in his talk. I’ve heard that he
used to go into the Old Forest at one time, and he has the reputation
of knowing a good many strange things. But you can at least tell us,
Frodo, whether you think his guess good or bad.’
‘I think,’ answered Frodo slowly, ‘that it was a good guess, as far
as it goes. There is a connexion with Bilbo’s old adventures, and the
Riders are looking, or perhaps one ought to say searching, for him or
for me. I also fear, if you want to know, that it is no joke at all; and
that I am not safe here or anywhere else.’ He looked round at the
windows and walls, as if he was afraid they would suddenly give way.
The others looked at him in silence, and exchanged meaning glances
among themselves.
‘It’s coming out in a minute,’ whispered Pippin to Merry. Merry
nodded.
‘Well!’ said Frodo at last, sitting up and straightening his back, as
if he had made a decision. ‘I can’t keep it dark any longer. I have
got something to tell you all. But I don’t know quite how to begin.’
‘I think I could help you,’ said Merry quietly, ‘by telling you some
of it myself.’
‘What do you mean?’ said Frodo, looking at him anxiously.
‘Just this, my dear old Frodo: you are miserable, because you don’t
know how to say good-bye. You meant to leave the Shire, of course.
But danger has come on you sooner than you expected, and now
you are making up your mind to go at once. And you don’t want to.
We are very sorry for you.’
Frodo opened his mouth and shut it again. His look of surprise
was so comical that they laughed. ‘Dear old Frodo!’ said Pippin. ‘Did
you really think you had thrown dust in all our eyes? You have not
been nearly careful or clever enough for that! You have obviously
been planning to go and saying farewell to all your haunts all this
year since April. We have constantly heard you muttering: ‘‘Shall I
ever look down into that valley again, I wonder’’, and things like
that. And pretending that you had come to the end of your money,
and actually selling your beloved Bag End to those Sackville-
Bagginses! And all those close talks with Gandalf.’
‘Good heavens!’ said Frodo. ‘I thought I had been both careful
and clever. I don’t know what Gandalf would say. Is all the Shire
discussing my departure then?’
‘Oh no!’ said Merry. ‘Don’t worry about that! The secret won’t
keep for long, of course; but at present it is, I think, only known to
us conspirators. After all, you must remember that we know you well,

and are often with you. We can usually guess what you are thinking.
I knew Bilbo, too. To tell you the truth, I have been watching you
rather closely ever since he left. I thought you would go after him
sooner or later; indeed I expected you to go sooner, and lately we
have been very anxious. We have been terriﬁed that you might give
us the slip, and go off suddenly, all on your own like he did. Ever
since this spring we have kept our eyes open, and done a good deal
of planning on our own account. You are not going to escape so
easily!’
‘But I must go,’ said Frodo. ‘It cannot be helped, dear friends. It
is wretched for us all, but it is no use your trying to keep me. Since
you have guessed so much, please help me and do not hinder me!’
‘You do not understand!’ said Pippin. ‘You must go – and there-
fore we must, too. Merry and I are coming with you. Sam is an
excellent fellow, and would jump down a dragon’s throat to save you,
if he did not trip over his own feet; but you will need more than one
companion in your dangerous adventure.’
‘My dear and most beloved hobbits!’ said Frodo deeply moved. ‘But
I could not allow it. I decided that long ago, too. You speak of danger,
but you do not understand. This is no treasure-hunt, no there-and-
back journey. I am ﬂying from deadly peril into deadly peril.’
‘Of course we understand,’ said Merry ﬁrmly. ‘That is why we
have decided to come. We know the Ring is no laughing-matter; but
we are going to do our best to help you against the Enemy.’
‘The Ring!’ said Frodo, now completely amazed.
‘Yes, the Ring,’ said Merry. ‘My dear old hobbit, you don’t allow
for the inquisitiveness of friends. I have known about the existence
of the Ring for years – before Bilbo went away, in fact; but since he
obviously regarded it as secret, I kept the knowledge in my head,
until we formed our conspiracy. I did not know Bilbo, of course, as
well as I know you; I was too young, and he was also more careful
– but he was not careful enough. If you want to know how I ﬁrst
found out, I will tell you.’
‘Go on!’ said Frodo faintly.
‘It was the Sackville-Bagginses that were his downfall, as you might
expect. One day, a year before the Party, I happened to be walking
along the road, when I saw Bilbo ahead. Suddenly in the distance
the S.-B.s appeared, coming towards us. Bilbo slowed down, and
then hey presto! he vanished. I was so startled that I hardly had the
wits to hide myself in a more ordinary fashion; but I got through the
hedge and walked along the ﬁeld inside. I was peeping through into
the road, after the S.-B.s had passed, and was looking straight at
Bilbo when he suddenly reappeared. I caught a glint of gold as he
put something back in his trouser-pocket.

‘After that I kept my eyes open. In fact, I confess that I spied. But
you must admit that it was very intriguing, and I was only in my
teens. I must be the only one in the Shire, besides you Frodo, that
has ever seen the old fellow’s secret book.’
‘You have read his book!’ cried Frodo. ‘Good heavens above! Is
nothing safe?’
‘Not too safe, I should say,’ said Merry. ‘But I have only had one
rapid glance, and that was difﬁcult to get. He never left the book
about. I wonder what became of it. I should like another look. Have
you got it, Frodo?’
‘No. It was not at Bag End. He must have taken it away.’
‘Well, as I was saying,’ Merry proceeded, ‘I kept my knowledge
to myself, till this spring when things got serious. Then we formed
our conspiracy; and as we were serious, too, and meant business, we
have not been too scrupulous. You are not a very easy nut to crack,
and Gandalf is worse. But if you want to be introduced to our chief
investigator, I can produce him.’
‘Where is he?’ said Frodo, looking round, as if he expected a
masked and sinister ﬁgure to come out of a cupboard.
‘Step forward, Sam!’ said Merry; and Sam stood up with a face
scarlet up to the ears. ‘Here’s our collector of information! And he
collected a lot, I can tell you, before he was ﬁnally caught. After
which, I may say, he seemed to regard himself as on parole, and
dried up.’
‘Sam!’ cried Frodo, feeling that amazement could go no further,
and quite unable to decide whether he felt angry, amused, relieved,
or merely foolish.
‘Yes, sir!’ said Sam. ‘Begging your pardon, sir! But I meant no
wrong to you, Mr. Frodo, nor to Mr. Gandalf for that matter. He
has some sense, mind you; and when you said go alone, he said no!
take someone as you can trust.’
‘But it does not seem that I can trust anyone,’ said Frodo.
Sam looked at him unhappily. ‘It all depends on what you want,’
put in Merry. ‘You can trust us to stick to you through thick and
thin – to the bitter end. And you can trust us to keep any secret of
yours – closer than you keep it yourself. But you cannot trust us to
let you face trouble alone, and go off without a word. We are your
friends, Frodo. Anyway: there it is. We know most of what Gandalf
has told you. We know a good deal about the Ring. We are horribly
afraid – but we are coming with you; or following you like hounds.’
‘And after all, sir,’ added Sam, ‘you did ought to take the Elves’
advice. Gildor said you should take them as was willing, and you
can’t deny it.’
‘I don’t deny it,’ said Frodo, looking at Sam, who was now

grinning. ‘I don’t deny it, but I’ll never believe you are sleeping again,
whether you snore or not. I shall kick you hard to make sure.
‘You are a set of deceitful scoundrels!’ he said, turning to the
others. ‘But bless you!’ he laughed, getting up and waving his arms,
‘I give in. I will take Gildor’s advice. If the danger were not so dark,
I should dance for joy. Even so, I cannot help feeling happy; happier
than I have felt for a long time. I had dreaded this evening.’
‘Good! That’s settled. Three cheers for Captain Frodo and com-
pany!’ they shouted; and they danced round him. Merry and Pippin
began a song, which they had apparently got ready for the occasion.
It was made on the model of the dwarf-song that started Bilbo on
his adventure long ago, and went to the same tune:
Farewell we call to hearth and hall!
Though wind may blow and rain may fall,
We must away ere break of day
Far over wood and mountain tall.
To Rivendell, where Elves yet dwell
In glades beneath the misty fell,
Through moor and waste we ride in haste,
And whither then we cannot tell.
With foes ahead, behind us dread,
Beneath the sky shall be our bed,
Until at last our toil be passed,
Our journey done, our errand sped.
We must away! We must away!
We ride before the break of day!
‘Very good!’ said Frodo. ‘But in that case there are a lot of things
to do before we go to bed – under a roof, for tonight at any rate.’
‘Oh! That was poetry!’ said Pippin. ‘Do you really mean to start
before the break of day?’
‘I don’t know,’ answered Frodo. ‘I fear those Black Riders, and
I am sure it is unsafe to stay in one place long, especially in a place
to which it is known I was going. Also Gildor advised me not to
wait. But I should very much like to see Gandalf. I could see that
even Gildor was disturbed when he heard that Gandalf had never
appeared. It really depends on two things. How soon could the Riders
get to Bucklebury? And how soon could we get off ? It will take a
good deal of preparation.’
‘The answer to the second question,’ said Merry, ‘is that we could

get off in an hour. I have prepared practically everything. There are
ﬁve ponies in a stable across the ﬁelds; stores and tackle are all
packed, except for a few extra clothes, and the perishable food.’
‘It seems to have been a very efﬁcient conspiracy,’ said Frodo.
‘But what about the Black Riders? Would it be safe to wait one day
for Gandalf ?’
‘That all depends on what you think the Riders would do, if they
found you here,’ answered Merry. ‘They could have reached here by
now, of course, if they were not stopped at the North-gate, where
the Hedge runs down to the river-bank, just this side of the Bridge.
The gate-guards would not let them through by night, though they
might break through. Even in the daylight they would try to keep
them out, I think, at any rate until they got a message through to
the Master of the Hall – for they would not like the look of the Riders,
and would certainly be frightened by them. But, of course, Buckland
cannot resist a determined attack for long. And it is possible that in
the morning even a Black Rider that rode up and asked for Mr.
Baggins would be let through. It is pretty generally known that you
are coming back to live at Crickhollow.’
Frodo sat for a while in thought. ‘I have made up my mind,’ he
said ﬁnally. ‘I am starting tomorrow, as soon as it is light. But I am
not going by road: it would be safer to wait here than that. If I go
through the North-gate my departure from Buckland will be known
at once, instead of being secret for several days at least, as it might be.
And what is more, the Bridge and the East Road near the borders will
certainly be watched, whether any Rider gets into Buckland or not. We
don’t know how many there are; but there are at least two, and possibly
more. The only thing to do is to go off in a quite unexpected direction.’
‘But that can only mean going into the Old Forest!’ said Fredegar
horriﬁed. ‘You can’t be thinking of doing that. It is quite as dangerous
as Black Riders.’
‘Not quite,’ said Merry. ‘It sounds very desperate, but I believe
Frodo is right. It is the only way of getting off without being followed
at once. With luck we might get a considerable start.’
‘But you won’t have any luck in the Old Forest,’ objected Fredegar.
‘No one ever has luck in there. You’ll get lost. People don’t go in there.’
‘Oh yes they do!’ said Merry. ‘The Brandybucks go in – occasion-
ally when the ﬁt takes them. We have a private entrance. Frodo went
in once, long ago. I have been in several times: usually in daylight,
of course, when the trees are sleepy and fairly quiet.’
‘Well, do as you think best!’ said Fredegar. ‘I am more afraid of
the Old Forest than of anything I know about: the stories about it
are a nightmare; but my vote hardly counts, as I am not going on

the journey. Still, I am very glad someone is stopping behind, who
can tell Gandalf what you have done, when he turns up, as I am sure
he will before long.’
Fond as he was of Frodo, Fatty Bolger had no desire to leave
the Shire, nor to see what lay outside it. His family came from the
Eastfarthing, from Budgeford in Bridgeﬁelds in fact, but he had never
been over the Brandywine Bridge. His task, according to the original
plans of the conspirators, was to stay behind and deal with inquisitive
folk, and to keep up as long as possible the pretence that Mr. Baggins
was still living at Crickhollow. He had even brought along some old
clothes of Frodo’s to help him in playing the part. They little thought
how dangerous that part might prove.
‘Excellent!’ said Frodo, when he understood the plan. ‘We could
not have left any message behind for Gandalf otherwise. I don’t know
whether these Riders can read or not, of course, but I should not
have dared to risk a written message, in case they got in and searched
the house. But if Fatty is willing to hold the fort, and I can be sure
of Gandalf knowing the way we have gone, that decides me. I am
going into the Old Forest ﬁrst thing tomorrow.’
‘Well, that’s that,’ said Pippin. ‘On the whole I would rather have
our job than Fatty’s – waiting here till Black Riders come.’
‘You wait till you are well inside the Forest,’ said Fredegar. ‘You’ll
wish you were back here with me before this time tomorrow.’
‘It’s no good arguing about it any more,’ said Merry. ‘We have
still got to tidy up and put the ﬁnishing touches to the packing, before
we get to bed. I shall call you all before the break of day.’
When at last he had got to bed, Frodo could not sleep for some
time. His legs ached. He was glad that he was riding in the morning.
Eventually he fell into a vague dream, in which he seemed to be
looking out of a high window over a dark sea of tangled trees. Down
below among the roots there was the sound of creatures crawling
and snufﬂing. He felt sure they would smell him out sooner or later.
Then he heard a noise in the distance. At ﬁrst he thought it was
a great wind coming over the leaves of the forest. Then he knew that
it was not leaves, but the sound of the Sea far-off; a sound he had
never heard in waking life, though it had often troubled his dreams.
Suddenly he found he was out in the open. There were no trees after
all. He was on a dark heath, and there was a strange salt smell in the
air. Looking up he saw before him a tall white tower, standing alone
on a high ridge. A great desire came over him to climb the tower
and see the Sea. He started to struggle up the ridge towards the
tower: but suddenly a light came in the sky, and there was a noise
of thunder.

Chapter 6
T H E  O L D  F O R E S T
Frodo woke suddenly. It was still dark in the room. Merry was stand-
ing there with a candle in one hand, and banging on the door with the
other. ‘All right! What is it?’ said Frodo, still shaken and bewildered.
‘What is it!’ cried Merry. ‘It is time to get up. It is half past four
and very foggy. Come on! Sam is already getting breakfast ready.
Even Pippin is up. I am just going to saddle the ponies, and fetch
the one that is to be the baggage-carrier. Wake that sluggard Fatty!
At least he must get up and see us off.’
Soon after six o’clock the ﬁve hobbits were ready to start. Fatty
Bolger was still yawning. They stole quietly out of the house. Merry
went in front leading a laden pony, and took his way along a path
that went through a spinney behind the house, and then cut across
several ﬁelds. The leaves of trees were glistening, and every twig was
dripping; the grass was grey with cold dew. Everything was still, and
far-away noises seemed near and clear: fowls chattering in a yard,
someone closing a door of a distant house.
In their shed they found the ponies: sturdy little beasts of the kind
loved by hobbits, not speedy, but good for a long day’s work. They
mounted, and soon they were riding off into the mist, which seemed
to open reluctantly before them and close forbiddingly behind them.
After riding for about an hour, slowly and without talking, they saw
the Hedge looming suddenly ahead. It was tall and netted over with
silver cobwebs.
‘How are you going to get through this?’ asked Fredegar.
‘Follow me!’ said Merry, ‘and you will see.’ He turned to the left
along the Hedge, and soon they came to a point where it bent inwards,
running along the lip of a hollow. A cutting had been made, at some
distance from the Hedge, and went sloping gently down into the
ground. It had walls of brick at the sides, which rose steadily, until
suddenly they arched over and formed a tunnel that dived deep under
the Hedge and came out in the hollow on the other side.
Here Fatty Bolger halted. ‘Good-bye, Frodo!’ he said. ‘I wish you
were not going into the Forest. I only hope you will not need rescu-
ing before the day is out. But good luck to you – today and every
day!’
‘If there are no worse things ahead than the Old Forest, I shall be
lucky,’ said Frodo. ‘Tell Gandalf to hurry along the East Road: we
shall soon be back on it and going as fast as we can.’ ‘Good-bye!’

they cried, and rode down the slope and disappeared from Fredegar’s
sight into the tunnel.
It was dark and damp. At the far end it was closed by a gate of
thick-set iron bars. Merry got down and unlocked the gate, and when
they had all passed through he pushed it to again. It shut with a
clang, and the lock clicked. The sound was ominous.
‘There!’ said Merry. ‘You have left the Shire, and are now outside,
and on the edge of the Old Forest.’
‘Are the stories about it true?’ asked Pippin.
‘I don’t know what stories you mean,’ Merry answered. ‘If you
mean the old bogey-stories Fatty’s nurses used to tell him, about
goblins and wolves and things of that sort, I should say no. At any
rate I don’t believe them. But the Forest is queer. Everything in it is
very much more alive, more aware of what is going on, so to speak,
than things are in the Shire. And the trees do not like strangers. They
watch you. They are usually content merely to watch you, as long as
daylight lasts, and don’t do much. Occasionally the most unfriendly
ones may drop a branch, or stick a root out, or grasp at you with a
long trailer. But at night things can be most alarming, or so I am
told. I have only once or twice been in here after dark, and then only
near the hedge. I thought all the trees were whispering to each other,
passing news and plots along in an unintelligible language; and the
branches swayed and groped without any wind. They do say the trees
do actually move, and can surround strangers and hem them in. In
fact long ago they attacked the Hedge: they came and planted them-
selves right by it, and leaned over it. But the hobbits came and cut
down hundreds of trees, and made a great bonﬁre in the Forest, and
burned all the ground in a long strip east of the Hedge. After that
the trees gave up the attack, but they became very unfriendly. There
is still a wide bare space not far inside where the bonﬁre was made.’
‘Is it only the trees that are dangerous?’ asked Pippin.
‘There are various queer things living deep in the Forest, and on
the far side,’ said Merry, ‘or at least I have heard so; but I have never
seen any of them. But something makes paths. Whenever one comes
inside one ﬁnds open tracks; but they seem to shift and change from
time to time in a queer fashion. Not far from this tunnel there is, or
was for a long time, the beginning of quite a broad path leading to
the Bonﬁre Glade, and then on more or less in our direction, east
and a little north. That is the path I am going to try and ﬁnd.’
The hobbits now left the tunnel-gate and rode across the wide
hollow. On the far side was a faint path leading up on to the ﬂoor
of the Forest, a hundred yards and more beyond the Hedge; but it
vanished as soon as it brought them under the trees. Looking back they

could see the dark line of the Hedge through the stems of trees that
were already thick about them. Looking ahead they could see only
tree-trunks of innumerable sizes and shapes: straight or bent, twisted,
leaning, squat or slender, smooth or gnarled and branched; and all
the stems were green or grey with moss and slimy, shaggy growths.
Merry alone seemed fairly cheerful. ‘You had better lead on and
ﬁnd that path,’ Frodo said to him. ‘Don’t let us lose one another, or
forget which way the Hedge lies!’
They picked a way among the trees, and their ponies plodded
along, carefully avoiding the many writhing and interlacing roots.
There was no undergrowth. The ground was rising steadily, and as
they went forward it seemed that the trees became taller, darker, and
thicker. There was no sound, except an occasional drip of moisture
falling through the still leaves. For the moment there was no whisper-
ing or movement among the branches; but they all got an uncomfort-
able feeling that they were being watched with disapproval, deepening
to dislike and even enmity. The feeling steadily grew, until they found
themselves looking up quickly, or glancing back over their shoulders,
as if they expected a sudden blow.
There was not as yet any sign of a path, and the trees seemed
constantly to bar their way. Pippin suddenly felt that he could not
bear it any longer, and without warning let out a shout. ‘Oi! Oi!’ he
cried. ‘I am not going to do anything. Just let me pass through, will
you!’
The others halted startled; but the cry fell as if mufﬂed by a heavy
curtain. There was no echo or answer though the wood seemed to
become more crowded and more watchful than before.
‘I should not shout, if I were you,’ said Merry. ‘It does more harm
than good.’
Frodo began to wonder if it were possible to ﬁnd a way through,
and if he had been right to make the others come into this abominable
wood. Merry was looking from side to side, and seemed already
uncertain which way to go. Pippin noticed it. ‘It has not taken you
long to lose us,’ he said. But at that moment Merry gave a whistle
of relief and pointed ahead.
‘Well, well!’ he said. ‘These trees do shift. There is the Bonﬁre
Glade in front of us (or I hope so), but the path to it seems to have
moved away!’
The light grew clearer as they went forward. Suddenly they came
out of the trees and found themselves in a wide circular space. There
was sky above them, blue and clear to their surprise, for down under
the Forest-roof they had not been able to see the rising morning and
the lifting of the mist. The sun was not, however, high enough yet

to shine down into the clearing, though its light was on the tree-tops.
The leaves were all thicker and greener about the edges of the glade,
enclosing it with an almost solid wall. No tree grew there, only rough
grass and many tall plants: stalky and faded hemlocks and wood-
parsley, ﬁre-weed seeding into ﬂuffy ashes, and rampant nettles and
thistles. A dreary place: but it seemed a charming and cheerful garden
after the close Forest.
The hobbits felt encouraged, and looked up hopefully at the broad-
ening daylight in the sky. At the far side of the glade there was a
break in the wall of trees, and a clear path beyond it. They could see
it running on into the wood, wide in places and open above, though
every now and again the trees drew in and overshadowed it with their
dark boughs. Up this path they rode. They were still climbing gently,
but they now went much quicker, and with better heart; for it seemed
to them that the Forest had relented, and was going to let them pass
unhindered after all.
But after a while the air began to get hot and stuffy. The trees
drew close again on either side, and they could no longer see far
ahead. Now stronger than ever they felt again the ill will of the wood
pressing on them. So silent was it that the fall of their ponies’ hoofs,
rustling on dead leaves and occasionally stumbling on hidden roots,
seemed to thud in their ears. Frodo tried to sing a song to encourage
them, but his voice sank to a murmur.
O! Wanderers in the shadowed land
despair not! For though dark they stand,
all woods there be must end at last,
and see the open sun go past:
the setting sun, the rising sun,
the day’s end, or the day begun.
For east or west all woods must fail . . .
Fail – even as he said the word his voice faded into silence. The
air seemed heavy and the making of words wearisome. Just behind
them a large branch fell from an old overhanging tree with a crash
into the path. The trees seemed to close in before them.
‘They do not like all that about ending and failing,’ said Merry.
‘I should not sing any more at present. Wait till we do get to the
edge, and then we’ll turn and give them a rousing chorus!’
He spoke cheerfully, and if he felt any great anxiety, he did not
show it. The others did not answer. They were depressed. A heavy
weight was settling steadily on Frodo’s heart, and he regretted now
with every step forward that he had ever thought of challenging the
menace of the trees. He was, indeed, just about to stop and propose

going back (if that was still possible), when things took a new turn.
The path stopped climbing, and became for a while nearly level. The
dark trees drew aside, and ahead they could see the path going almost
straight forward. Before them, but some distance off, there stood a
green hill-top, treeless, rising like a bald head out of the encircling
wood. The path seemed to be making directly for it.
They now hurried forward again, delighted with the thought of
climbing out for a while above the roof of the Forest. The path
dipped, and then again began to climb upwards, leading them at last
to the foot of the steep hillside. There it left the trees and faded into
the turf. The wood stood all round the hill like thick hair that ended
sharply in a circle round a shaven crown.
The hobbits led their ponies up, winding round and round until
they reached the top. There they stood and gazed about them. The
air was gleaming and sunlit, but hazy; and they could not see to any
great distance. Near at hand the mist was now almost gone; though
here and there it lay in hollows of the wood, and to the south of
them, out of a deep fold cutting right across the Forest, the fog still
rose like steam or wisps of white smoke.
‘That,’ said Merry, pointing with his hand, ‘that is the line of the
Withywindle. It comes down out of the Downs and ﬂows south-west
through the midst of the Forest to join the Brandywine below
Haysend. We don’t want to go that way! The Withywindle valley is
said to be the queerest part of the whole wood – the centre from
which all the queerness comes, as it were.’
The others looked in the direction that Merry pointed out, but
they could see little but mists over the damp and deep-cut valley;
and beyond it the southern half of the Forest faded from view.
The sun on the hill-top was now getting hot. It must have been
about eleven o’clock; but the autumn haze still prevented them from
seeing much in other directions. In the west they could not make out
either the line of the Hedge or the valley of the Brandywine beyond
it. Northward, where they looked most hopefully, they could see
nothing that might be the line of the great East Road, for which they
were making. They were on an island in a sea of trees, and the horizon
was veiled.
On the south-eastern side the ground fell very steeply, as if the
slopes of the hill were continued far down under the trees, like island-
shores that really are the sides of a mountain rising out of deep waters.
They sat on the green edge and looked out over the woods below
them, while they ate their mid-day meal. As the sun rose and passed
noon they glimpsed far off in the east the grey-green lines of the
Downs that lay beyond the Old Forest on that side. That cheered

them greatly; for it was good to see a sight of anything beyond the
wood’s borders, though they did not mean to go that way, if they
could help it: the Barrow-downs had as sinister a reputation in hobbit-
legend as the Forest itself.
At length they made up their minds to go on again. The path that
had brought them to the hill reappeared on the northward side; but
they had not followed it far before they became aware that it was
bending steadily to the right. Soon it began to descend rapidly and
they guessed that it must actually be heading towards the Withy-
windle valley: not at all the direction they wished to take. After some
discussion they decided to leave this misleading path and strike north-
ward; for although they had not been able to see it from the hill-top,
the Road must lie that way, and it could not be many miles off. Also
northward, and to the left of the path, the land seemed to be drier
and more open, climbing up to slopes where the trees were thinner,
and pines and ﬁrs replaced the oaks and ashes and other strange and
nameless trees of the denser wood.
At ﬁrst their choice seemed to be good: they got along at a fair
speed, though whenever they got a glimpse of the sun in an open
glade they seemed unaccountably to have veered eastwards. But after
a time the trees began to close in again, just where they had appeared
from a distance to be thinner and less tangled. Then deep folds
in the ground were discovered unexpectedly, like the ruts of great
giant-wheels or wide moats and sunken roads long disused and
choked with brambles. These lay usually right across their line of
march, and could only be crossed by scrambling down and out again,
which was troublesome and difﬁcult with their ponies. Each time
they climbed down they found the hollow ﬁlled with thick bushes
and matted undergrowth, which somehow would not yield to the
left, but only gave way when they turned to the right; and they had
to go some distance along the bottom before they could ﬁnd a way
up the further bank. Each time they clambered out, the trees seemed
deeper and darker; and always to the left and upwards it was most
difﬁcult to ﬁnd a way, and they were forced to the right and
downwards.
After an hour or two they had lost all clear sense of direction,
though they knew well enough that they had long ceased to go north-
ward at all. They were being headed off, and were simply following
a course chosen for them – eastwards and southwards, into the heart
of the Forest and not out of it.
The afternoon was wearing away when they scrambled and
stumbled into a fold that was wider and deeper than any they had

yet met. It was so steep and overhung that it proved impossible to
climb out of it again, either forwards or backwards, without leaving
their ponies and their baggage behind. All they could do was to follow
the fold – downwards. The ground grew soft, and in places boggy;
springs appeared in the banks, and soon they found themselves fol-
lowing a brook that trickled and babbled through a weedy bed. Then
the ground began to fall rapidly, and the brook growing strong and
noisy, ﬂowed and leaped swiftly downhill. They were in a deep dim-lit
gully over-arched by trees high above them.
After stumbling along for some way along the stream, they came
quite suddenly out of the gloom. As if through a gate they saw the
sunlight before them. Coming to the opening they found that they
had made their way down through a cleft in a high steep bank, almost
a cliff. At its feet was a wide space of grass and reeds; and in the
distance could be glimpsed another bank almost as steep. A golden
afternoon of late sunshine lay warm and drowsy upon the hidden
land between. In the midst of it there wound lazily a dark river of
brown water, bordered with ancient willows, arched over with willows,
blocked with fallen willows, and ﬂecked with thousands of faded
willow-leaves. The air was thick with them, ﬂuttering yellow from
the branches; for there was a warm and gentle breeze blowing softly
in the valley, and the reeds were rustling, and the willow-boughs were
creaking.
‘Well, now I have at least some notion of where we are!’ said
Merry. ‘We have come almost in the opposite direction to which we
intended. This is the River Withywindle! I will go on and explore.’
He passed out into the sunshine and disappeared into the long
grasses. After a while he reappeared, and reported that there was
fairly solid ground between the cliff-foot and the river; in some places
ﬁrm turf went down to the water’s edge. ‘What’s more,’ he said,
‘there seems to be something like a footpath winding along on this
side of the river. If we turn left and follow it, we shall be bound to
come out on the east side of the Forest eventually.’
‘I dare say!’ said Pippin. ‘That is, if the track goes on so far, and
does not simply lead us into a bog and leave us there. Who made
the track, do you suppose, and why? I am sure it was not for our
beneﬁt. I am getting very suspicious of this Forest and everything in
it, and I begin to believe all the stories about it. And have you any
idea how far eastward we should have to go?’
‘No,’ said Merry, ‘I haven’t. I don’t know in the least how far
down the Withywindle we are, or who could possibly come here often
enough to make a path along it. But there is no other way out that
I can see or think of.’
There being nothing else for it, they ﬁled out, and Merry led them

to the path that he had discovered. Everywhere the reeds and grasses
were lush and tall, in places far above their heads; but once found,
the path was easy to follow, as it turned and twisted, picking out the
sounder ground among the bogs and pools. Here and there it passed
over other rills, running down gullies into the Withywindle out of
the higher forest-lands, and at these points there were tree-trunks or
bundles of brushwood laid carefully across.
The hobbits began to feel very hot. There were armies of ﬂies of
all kinds buzzing round their ears, and the afternoon sun was burning
on their backs. At last they came suddenly into a thin shade; great
grey branches reached across the path. Each step forward became
more reluctant than the last. Sleepiness seemed to be creeping out
of the ground and up their legs, and falling softly out of the air upon
their heads and eyes.
Frodo felt his chin go down and his head nod. Just in front of him
Pippin fell forward on to his knees. Frodo halted. ‘It’s no good,’ he
heard Merry saying. ‘Can’t go another step without rest. Must have
nap. It’s cool under the willows. Less ﬂies!’
Frodo did not like the sound of this. ‘Come on!’ he cried. ‘We
can’t have a nap yet. We must get clear of the Forest ﬁrst.’ But the
others were too far gone to care. Beside them Sam stood yawning
and blinking stupidly.
Suddenly Frodo himself felt sleep overwhelming him. His head
swam. There now seemed hardly a sound in the air. The ﬂies had
stopped buzzing. Only a gentle noise on the edge of hearing, a soft
ﬂuttering as of a song half whispered, seemed to stir in the boughs
above. He lifted his heavy eyes and saw leaning over him a huge
willow-tree, old and hoary. Enormous it looked, its sprawling
branches going up like reaching arms with many long-ﬁngered hands,
its knotted and twisted trunk gaping in wide ﬁssures that creaked
faintly as the boughs moved. The leaves ﬂuttering against the bright
sky dazzled him, and he toppled over, lying where he fell upon the
grass.
Merry and Pippin dragged themselves forward and lay down with
their backs to the willow-trunk. Behind them the great cracks gaped
wide to receive them as the tree swayed and creaked. They looked
up at the grey and yellow leaves, moving softly against the light, and
singing. They shut their eyes, and then it seemed that they could
almost hear words, cool words, saying something about water and
sleep. They gave themselves up to the spell and fell fast asleep at the
foot of the great grey willow.
Frodo lay for a while ﬁghting with the sleep that was overpowering
him; then with an effort he struggled to his feet again. He felt a

compelling desire for cool water. ‘Wait for me, Sam,’ he stammered.
‘Must bathe feet a minute.’
Half in a dream he wandered forward to the riverward side of the
tree, where great winding roots grew out into the stream, like gnarled
dragonets straining down to drink. He straddled one of these, and
paddled his hot feet in the cool brown water; and there he too
suddenly fell asleep with his back against the tree.
Sam sat down and scratched his head, and yawned like a cavern.
He was worried. The afternoon was getting late, and he thought this
sudden sleepiness uncanny. ‘There’s more behind this than sun and
warm air,’ he muttered to himself. ‘I don’t like this great big tree. I
don’t trust it. Hark at it singing about sleep now! This won’t do at
all!’
He pulled himself to his feet, and staggered off to see what had
become of the ponies. He found that two had wandered on a good
way along the path; and he had just caught them and brought them
back towards the others, when he heard two noises; one loud, and
the other soft but very clear. One was the splash of something heavy
falling into the water; the other was a noise like the snick of a lock
when a door quietly closes fast.
He rushed back to the bank. Frodo was in the water close to the
edge, and a great tree-root seemed to be over him and holding him
down, but he was not struggling. Sam gripped him by the jacket, and
dragged him from under the root; and then with difﬁculty hauled
him on to the bank. Almost at once he woke, and coughed and
spluttered.
‘Do you know, Sam,’ he said at length, ‘the beastly tree threw me
in! I felt it. The big root just twisted round and tipped me in!’
‘You were dreaming I expect, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam. ‘You
shouldn’t sit in such a place, if you feel sleepy.’
‘What about the others?’ Frodo asked. ‘I wonder what sort of
dreams they are having.’
They went round to the other side of the tree, and then Sam
understood the click that he had heard. Pippin had vanished. The
crack by which he had laid himself had closed together, so that not
a chink could be seen. Merry was trapped: another crack had closed
about his waist; his legs lay outside, but the rest of him was inside a
dark opening, the edges of which gripped like a pair of pincers.
Frodo and Sam beat ﬁrst upon the tree-trunk where Pippin had
lain. They then struggled frantically to pull open the jaws of the crack
that held poor Merry. It was quite useless.
‘What a foul thing to happen!’ cried Frodo wildly. ‘Why did we
ever come into this dreadful Forest? I wish we were all back at

Crickhollow!’ He kicked the tree with all his strength, heedless of his
own feet. A hardly perceptible shiver ran through the stem and up
into the branches; the leaves rustled and whispered, but with a sound
now of faint and far-off laughter.
‘I suppose we haven’t got an axe among our luggage, Mr. Frodo?’
asked Sam.
‘I brought a little hatchet for chopping ﬁrewood,’ said Frodo. ‘That
wouldn’t be much use.’
‘Wait a minute!’ cried Sam, struck by an idea suggested by ﬁre-
wood. ‘We might do something with ﬁre!’
‘We might,’ said Frodo doubtfully. ‘We might succeed in roasting
Pippin alive inside.’
‘We might try to hurt or frighten this tree to begin with,’ said Sam
ﬁercely. ‘If it don’t let them go, I’ll have it down, if I have to gnaw
it.’ He ran to the ponies and before long came back with two tinder-
boxes and a hatchet.
Quickly they gathered dry grass and leaves, and bits of bark; and
made a pile of broken twigs and chopped sticks. These they heaped
against the trunk on the far side of the tree from the prisoners. As
soon as Sam had struck a spark into the tinder, it kindled the dry
grass and a ﬂurry of ﬂame and smoke went up. The twigs crackled.
Little ﬁngers of ﬁre licked against the dry scored rind of the ancient
tree and scorched it. A tremor ran through the whole willow. The
leaves seemed to hiss above their heads with a sound of pain and
anger. A loud scream came from Merry, and from far inside the tree
they heard Pippin give a mufﬂed yell.
‘Put it out! Put it out!’ cried Merry. ‘He’ll squeeze me in two, if
you don’t. He says so!’
‘Who? What?’ shouted Frodo, rushing round to the other side of
the tree.
‘Put it out! Put it out!’ begged Merry. The branches of the willow
began to sway violently. There was a sound as of a wind rising and
spreading outwards to the branches of all the other trees round about,
as though they had dropped a stone into the quiet slumber of the
river-valley and set up ripples of anger that ran out over the whole
Forest. Sam kicked at the little ﬁre and stamped out the sparks. But
Frodo, without any clear idea of why he did so, or what he hoped
for, ran along the path crying help! help! help! It seemed to him that
he could hardly hear the sound of his own shrill voice: it was blown
away from him by the willow-wind and drowned in a clamour of
leaves, as soon as the words left his mouth. He felt desperate: lost
and witless.
Suddenly he stopped. There was an answer, or so he thought; but
it seemed to come from behind him, away down the path further

back in the Forest. He turned round and listened, and soon there
could be no doubt: someone was singing a song; a deep glad voice
was singing carelessly and happily, but it was singing nonsense:
Hey dol! merry dol! ring a dong dillo!
Ring a dong! hop along! fal lal the willow!
Tom Bom, jolly Tom, Tom Bombadillo!
Half hopeful and half afraid of some new danger, Frodo and Sam
now both stood still. Suddenly out of a long string of nonsense-words
(or so they seemed) the voice rose up loud and clear and burst into
this song:
Hey! Come merry dol! derry dol! My darling!
Light goes the weather-wind and the feathered starling.
Down along under Hill, shining in the sunlight,
Waiting on the doorstep for the cold starlight,
There my pretty lady is, River-woman’s daughter,
Slender as the willow-wand, clearer than the water.
Old Tom Bombadil water-lilies bringing
Comes hopping home again. Can you hear him singing?
Hey! Come merry dol! derry dol! and merry-o,
Goldberry, Goldberry, merry yellow berry-o!
Poor old Willow-man, you tuck your roots away!
Tom’s in a hurry now. Evening will follow day.
Tom’s going home again water-lilies bringing.
Hey! Come derry dol! Can you hear me singing?
Frodo and Sam stood as if enchanted. The wind puffed out. The
leaves hung silently again on stiff branches. There was another burst
of song, and then suddenly, hopping and dancing along the path,
there appeared above the reeds an old battered hat with a tall crown
and a long blue feather stuck in the band. With another hop and a
bound there came into view a man, or so it seemed. At any rate he
was too large and heavy for a hobbit, if not quite tall enough for one
of the Big People, though he made noise enough for one, stumping
along with great yellow boots on his thick legs, and charging through
grass and rushes like a cow going down to drink. He had a blue coat
and a long brown beard; his eyes were blue and bright, and his face
was red as a ripe apple, but creased into a hundred wrinkles of
laughter. In his hands he carried on a large leaf as on a tray a small
pile of white water-lilies.
‘Help!’ cried Frodo and Sam running towards him with their hands
stretched out.

‘Whoa! Whoa! steady there!’ cried the old man, holding up one
hand, and they stopped short, as if they had been struck stiff. ‘Now,
my little fellows, where be you a-going to, pufﬁng like a bellows?
What’s the matter here then? Do you know who I am? I’m Tom
Bombadil. Tell me what’s your trouble! Tom’s in a hurry now. Don’t
you crush my lilies!’
‘My friends are caught in the willow-tree,’ cried Frodo breathlessly.
‘Master Merry’s being squeezed in a crack!’ cried Sam.
‘What?’ shouted Tom Bombadil, leaping up in the air. ‘Old Man
Willow? Naught worse than that, eh? That can soon be mended. I
know the tune for him. Old grey Willow-man! I’ll freeze his marrow
cold, if he don’t behave himself. I’ll sing his roots off. I’ll sing a wind
up and blow leaf and branch away. Old Man Willow!’
Setting down his lilies carefully on the grass, he ran to the tree.
There he saw Merry’s feet still sticking out – the rest had already
been drawn further inside. Tom put his mouth to the crack and
began singing into it in a low voice. They could not catch the
words, but evidently Merry was aroused. His legs began to kick. Tom
sprang away, and breaking off a hanging branch smote the side of
the willow with it. ‘You let them out again, Old Man Willow!’ he
said. ‘What be you a-thinking of ? You should not be waking. Eat
earth! Dig deep! Drink water! Go to sleep! Bombadil is talking!’ He
then seized Merry’s feet and drew him out of the suddenly widening
crack.
There was a tearing creak and the other crack split open, and out
of it Pippin sprang, as if he had been kicked. Then with a loud snap
both cracks closed fast again. A shudder ran through the tree from
root to tip, and complete silence fell.
‘Thank you!’ said the hobbits, one after the other.
Tom Bombadil burst out laughing. ‘Well, my little fellows!’ said
he, stooping so that he peered into their faces. ‘You shall come home
with me! The table is all laden with yellow cream, honeycomb, and
white bread and butter. Goldberry is waiting. Time enough for ques-
tions around the supper table. You follow after me as quick as you
are able!’ With that he picked up his lilies, and then with a beckoning
wave of his hand went hopping and dancing along the path eastward,
still singing loudly and nonsensically.
Too surprised and too relieved to talk, the hobbits followed after
him as fast as they could. But that was not fast enough. Tom soon
disappeared in front of them, and the noise of his singing got fainter
and further away. Suddenly his voice came ﬂoating back to them in
a loud halloo!

Hop along, my little friends, up the Withywindle!
Tom’s going on ahead candles for to kindle.
Down west sinks the Sun: soon you will be groping.
When the night-shadows fall, then the door will open,
Out of the window-panes light will twinkle yellow.
Fear no alder black! Heed no hoary willow!
Fear neither root nor bough! Tom goes on before you.
Hey now! merry dol! We’ll be waiting for you!
After that the hobbits heard no more. Almost at once the sun
seemed to sink into the trees behind them. They thought of the
slanting light of evening glittering on the Brandywine River, and the
windows of Bucklebury beginning to gleam with hundreds of lights.
Great shadows fell across them; trunks and branches of trees hung
dark and threatening over the path. White mists began to rise and
curl on the surface of the river and stray about the roots of the trees
upon its borders. Out of the very ground at their feet a shadowy
steam arose and mingled with the swiftly falling dusk.
It became difﬁcult to follow the path, and they were very tired.
Their legs seemed leaden. Strange furtive noises ran among the
bushes and reeds on either side of them; and if they looked up to
the pale sky, they caught sight of queer gnarled and knobbly faces
that gloomed dark against the twilight, and leered down at them from
the high bank and the edges of the wood. They began to feel that all
this country was unreal, and that they were stumbling through an
ominous dream that led to no awakening.
Just as they felt their feet slowing down to a standstill, they noticed
that the ground was gently rising. The water began to murmur. In
the darkness they caught the white glimmer of foam, where the river
ﬂowed over a short fall. Then suddenly the trees came to an end and
the mists were left behind. They stepped out from the Forest, and
found a wide sweep of grass welling up before them. The river, now
small and swift, was leaping merrily down to meet them, glinting
here and there in the light of the stars, which were already shining
in the sky.
The grass under their feet was smooth and short, as if it had been
mown or shaven. The eaves of the Forest behind were clipped, and
trim as a hedge. The path was now plain before them, well-tended
and bordered with stone. It wound up on to the top of a grassy knoll,
now grey under the pale starry night; and there, still high above them
on a further slope, they saw the twinkling lights of a house. Down
again the path went, and then up again, up a long smooth hillside
of turf, towards the light. Suddenly a wide yellow beam ﬂowed out
brightly from a door that was opened. There was Tom Bombadil’s

house before them, up, down, under hill. Behind it a steep shoulder
of the land lay grey and bare, and beyond that the dark shapes of
the Barrow-downs stalked away into the eastern night.
They all hurried forward, hobbits and ponies. Already half their
weariness and all their fears had fallen from them. Hey! Come merry
dol! rolled out the song to greet them.
Hey! Come derry dol! Hop along, my hearties!
Hobbits! Ponies all! We are fond of parties.
Now let the fun begin! Let us sing together!
Then another clear voice, as young and as ancient as Spring, like
the song of a glad water ﬂowing down into the night from a bright
morning in the hills, came falling like silver to meet them:
Now let the song begin! Let us sing together
Of sun, stars, moon and mist, rain and cloudy weather,
Light on the budding leaf, dew on the feather,
Wind on the open hill, bells on the heather,
Reeds by the shady pool, lilies on the water:
Old Tom Bombadil and the River-daughter!
And with that song the hobbits stood upon the threshold, and a
golden light was all about them.

Chapter 7
I N  T H E  H O U S E  O F
T O M  B O M B A D I L
The four hobbits stepped over the wide stone threshold, and stood
still, blinking. They were in a long low room, ﬁlled with the light of
lamps swinging from the beams of the roof; and on the table of dark
polished wood stood many candles, tall and yellow, burning brightly.
In a chair, at the far side of the room facing the outer door, sat a
woman. Her long yellow hair rippled down her shoulders; her gown
was green, green as young reeds, shot with silver like beads of dew;
and her belt was of gold, shaped like a chain of ﬂag-lilies set with
the pale-blue eyes of forget-me-nots. About her feet in wide vessels
of green and brown earthenware, white water-lilies were ﬂoating, so
that she seemed to be enthroned in the midst of a pool.
‘Enter, good guests!’ she said, and as she spoke they knew that it
was her clear voice they had heard singing. They came a few timid
steps further into the room, and began to bow low, feeling strangely
surprised and awkward, like folk that, knocking at a cottage door to
beg for a drink of water, have been answered by a fair young elf-queen
clad in living ﬂowers. But before they could say anything, she sprang
lightly up and over the lily-bowls, and ran laughing towards them;
and as she ran her gown rustled softly like the wind in the ﬂowering
borders of a river.
‘Come dear folk!’ she said, taking Frodo by the hand. ‘Laugh and
be merry! I am Goldberry, daughter of the River.’ Then lightly she
passed them and closing the door she turned her back to it, with her
white arms spread out across it. ‘Let us shut out the night!’ she said.
‘For you are still afraid, perhaps, of mist and tree-shadows and deep
water, and untame things. Fear nothing! For tonight you are under
the roof of Tom Bombadil.’
The hobbits looked at her in wonder; and she looked at each of
them and smiled. ‘Fair lady Goldberry!’ said Frodo at last, feeling
his heart moved with a joy that he did not understand. He stood as
he had at times stood enchanted by fair elven-voices; but the spell
that was now laid upon him was different: less keen and lofty was
the delight, but deeper and nearer to mortal heart; marvellous and
yet not strange. ‘Fair lady Goldberry!’ he said again. ‘Now the joy
that was hidden in the songs we heard is made plain to me.

O slender as a willow-wand! O clearer than clear water!
O reed by the living pool! Fair River-daughter!
O spring-time and summer-time, and spring again after!
O wind on the waterfall, and the leaves’ laughter!’
Suddenly he stopped and stammered, overcome with surprise to hear
himself saying such things. But Goldberry laughed.
‘Welcome!’ she said. ‘I had not heard that folk of the Shire were
so sweet-tongued. But I see that you are an Elf-friend; the light in
your eyes and the ring in your voice tells it. This is a merry meeting!
Sit now, and wait for the Master of the house! He will not be long.
He is tending your tired beasts.’
The hobbits sat down gladly in low rush-seated chairs, while Gold-
berry busied herself about the table; and their eyes followed her, for
the slender grace of her movement ﬁlled them with quiet delight.
From somewhere behind the house came the sound of singing. Every
now and again they caught, among many a derry dol and a merry dol
and a ring a ding dillo the repeated words:
Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow;
Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow.
‘Fair lady!’ said Frodo again after a while. ‘Tell me, if my asking
does not seem foolish, who is Tom Bombadil?’
‘He is,’ said Goldberry, staying her swift movements and smiling.
Frodo looked at her questioningly. ‘He is, as you have seen him,’
she said in answer to his look. ‘He is the Master of wood, water, and
hill.’
‘Then all this strange land belongs to him?’
‘No indeed!’ she answered, and her smile faded. ‘That would
indeed be a burden,’ she added in a low voice, as if to herself. ‘The
trees and the grasses and all things growing or living in the land
belong each to themselves. Tom Bombadil is the Master. No one
has ever caught old Tom walking in the forest, wading in the water,
leaping on the hill-tops under light and shadow. He has no fear. Tom
Bombadil is master.’
A door opened and in came Tom Bombadil. He had now no hat
and his thick brown hair was crowned with autumn leaves. He
laughed, and going to Goldberry, took her hand.
‘Here’s my pretty lady!’ he said, bowing to the hobbits. ‘Here’s
my Goldberry clothed all in silver-green with ﬂowers in her girdle!
Is the table laden? I see yellow cream and honeycomb, and white
bread, and butter; milk, cheese, and green herbs and ripe berries
gathered. Is that enough for us? Is the supper ready?’

‘It is,’ said Goldberry; ‘but the guests perhaps are not?’
Tom clapped his hands and cried: ‘Tom, Tom! your guests are
tired, and you had near forgotten! Come now, my merry friends, and
Tom will refresh you! You shall clean grimy hands, and wash your
weary faces; cast off your muddy cloaks and comb out your tangles!’
He opened the door, and they followed him down a short passage
and round a sharp turn. They came to a low room with a sloping
roof (a penthouse, it seemed, built on to the north end of the house).
Its walls were of clean stone, but they were mostly covered with green
hanging mats and yellow curtains. The ﬂoor was ﬂagged, and strewn
with fresh green rushes. There were four deep mattresses, each piled
with white blankets, laid on the ﬂoor along one side. Against the
opposite wall was a long bench laden with wide earthenware basins,
and beside it stood brown ewers ﬁlled with water, some cold, some
steaming hot. There were soft green slippers set ready beside each
bed.
Before long, washed and refreshed, the hobbits were seated at the
table, two on each side, while at either end sat Goldberry and the
Master. It was a long and merry meal. Though the hobbits ate, as
only famished hobbits can eat, there was no lack. The drink in their
drinking-bowls seemed to be clear cold water, yet it went to their
hearts like wine and set free their voices. The guests became suddenly
aware that they were singing merrily, as if it was easier and more
natural than talking.
At last Tom and Goldberry rose and cleared the table swiftly. The
guests were commanded to sit quiet, and were set in chairs, each
with a footstool to his tired feet. There was a ﬁre in the wide hearth
before them, and it was burning with a sweet smell, as if it were built
of apple-wood. When everything was set in order, all the lights in
the room were put out, except one lamp and a pair of candles at
each end of the chimney-shelf. Then Goldberry came and stood
before them, holding a candle; and she wished them each a good
night and deep sleep.
‘Have peace now,’ she said, ‘until the morning! Heed no nightly
noises! For nothing passes door and window here save moonlight
and starlight and the wind off the hill-top. Good night!’ She passed
out of the room with a glimmer and a rustle. The sound of her
footsteps was like a stream falling gently away downhill over cool
stones in the quiet of night.
Tom sat on a while beside them in silence, while each of them
tried to muster the courage to ask one of the many questions he had
meant to ask at supper. Sleep gathered on their eyelids. At last Frodo
spoke:

‘Did you hear me calling, Master, or was it just chance that brought
you at that moment?’
Tom stirred like a man shaken out of a pleasant dream. ‘Eh, what?’
said he. ‘Did I hear you calling? Nay, I did not hear: I was busy
singing. Just chance brought me then, if chance you call it. It was
no plan of mine, though I was waiting for you. We heard news of
you, and learned that you were wandering. We guessed you’d come
ere long down to the water: all paths lead that way, down to Withy-
windle. Old grey Willow-man, he’s a mighty singer; and it’s hard for
little folk to escape his cunning mazes. But Tom had an errand there,
that he dared not hinder.’ Tom nodded as if sleep was taking him
again; but he went on in a soft singing voice:
I had an errand there: gathering water-lilies,
green leaves and lilies white to please my pretty lady,
the last ere the year’s end to keep them from the winter,
to ﬂower by her pretty feet till the snows are melted.
Each year at summer’s end I go to ﬁnd them for her,
in a wide pool, deep and clear, far down Withywindle;
there they open ﬁrst in spring and there they linger latest.
By that pool long ago I found the River-daughter,
fair young Goldberry sitting in the rushes.
Sweet was her singing then, and her heart was beating!
He opened his eyes and looked at them with a sudden glint of blue:
And that proved well for you – for now I shall no longer
go down deep again along the forest-water,
not while the year is old. Nor shall I be passing
Old Man Willow’s house this side of spring-time,
not till the merry spring, when the River-daughter
dances down the withy-path to bathe in the water.
He fell silent again; but Frodo could not help asking one more
question: the one he most desired to have answered. ‘Tell us, Master,’
he said, ‘about the Willow-man. What is he? I have never heard of
him before.’
‘No, don’t!’ said Merry and Pippin together, sitting suddenly
upright. ‘Not now! Not until the morning!’
‘That is right!’ said the old man. ‘Now is the time for resting.
Some things are ill to hear when the world’s in shadow. Sleep till the
morning-light, rest on the pillow! Heed no nightly noise! Fear no
grey willow!’ And with that he took down the lamp and blew it out,
and grasping a candle in either hand he led them out of the room.

Their mattresses and pillows were soft as down, and the blankets
were of white wool. They had hardly laid themselves on the deep
beds and drawn the light covers over them before they were asleep.
In the dead night, Frodo lay in a dream without light. Then he
saw the young moon rising; under its thin light there loomed before
him a black wall of rock, pierced by a dark arch like a great gate. It
seemed to Frodo that he was lifted up, and passing over he saw that
the rock-wall was a circle of hills, and that within it was a plain, and
in the midst of the plain stood a pinnacle of stone, like a vast tower
but not made by hands. On its top stood the ﬁgure of a man. The
moon as it rose seemed to hang for a moment above his head and
glistened in his white hair as the wind stirred it. Up from the dark
plain below came the crying of fell voices, and the howling of many
wolves. Suddenly a shadow, like the shape of great wings, passed
across the moon. The ﬁgure lifted his arms and a light ﬂashed from
the staff that he wielded. A mighty eagle swept down and bore him
away. The voices wailed and the wolves yammered. There was a
noise like a strong wind blowing, and on it was borne the sound of
hoofs, galloping, galloping, galloping from the East. ‘Black Riders!’
thought Frodo as he wakened, with the sound of the hoofs still echo-
ing in his mind. He wondered if he would ever again have the courage
to leave the safety of these stone walls. He lay motionless, still listen-
ing; but all was now silent, and at last he turned and fell asleep again
or wandered into some other unremembered dream.
At his side Pippin lay dreaming pleasantly; but a change came
over his dreams and he turned and groaned. Suddenly he woke, or
thought he had waked, and yet still heard in the darkness the sound
that had disturbed his dream: tip-tap, squeak: the noise was like
branches fretting in the wind, twig-ﬁngers scraping wall and window:
creak, creak, creak. He wondered if there were willow-trees close to
the house; and then suddenly he had a dreadful feeling that he was
not in an ordinary house at all, but inside the willow and listening
to that horrible dry creaking voice laughing at him again. He sat up,
and felt the soft pillows yield to his hands, and he lay down again
relieved. He seemed to hear the echo of words in his ears: ‘Fear
nothing! Have peace until the morning! Heed no nightly noises!’
Then he went to sleep again.
It was the sound of water that Merry heard falling into his quiet
sleep: water streaming down gently, and then spreading, spreading
irresistibly all round the house into a dark shoreless pool. It gurgled
under the walls, and was rising slowly but surely. ‘I shall be drowned!’
he thought. ‘It will ﬁnd its way in, and then I shall drown.’ He felt
that he was lying in a soft slimy bog, and springing up he set his foot

on the corner of a cold hard ﬂagstone. Then he remembered where
he was and lay down again. He seemed to hear or remember hearing:
‘Nothing passes doors or windows save moonlight and starlight and
the wind off the hill-top.’ A little breath of sweet air moved the
curtain. He breathed deep and fell asleep again.
As far as he could remember, Sam slept through the night in deep
content, if logs are contented.
They woke up, all four at once, in the morning light. Tom was
moving about the room whistling like a starling. When he heard them
stir he clapped his hands, and cried: ‘Hey! Come merry dol! derry
dol! My hearties!’ He drew back the yellow curtains, and the hobbits
saw that these had covered the windows, at either end of the room,
one looking east and the other looking west.
They leapt up refreshed. Frodo ran to the eastern window, and
found himself looking into a kitchen-garden grey with dew. He had
half expected to see turf right up to the walls, turf all pocked with
hoof-prints. Actually his view was screened by a tall line of beans on
poles; but above and far beyond them the grey top of the hill loomed
up against the sunrise. It was a pale morning: in the East, behind
long clouds like lines of soiled wool stained red at the edges, lay
glimmering deeps of yellow. The sky spoke of rain to come; but the
light was broadening quickly, and the red ﬂowers on the beans began
to glow against the wet green leaves.
Pippin looked out of the western window, down into a pool of
mist. The Forest was hidden under a fog. It was like looking down
on to a sloping cloud-roof from above. There was a fold or channel
where the mist was broken into many plumes and billows: the valley
of the Withywindle. The stream ran down the hill on the left and
vanished into the white shadows. Near at hand was a ﬂower-garden
and a clipped hedge silver-netted, and beyond that grey shaven grass
pale with dew-drops. There was no willow-tree to be seen.
‘Good morning, merry friends!’ cried Tom, opening the eastern
window wide. A cool air ﬂowed in; it had a rainy smell. ‘Sun won’t
show her face much today, I’m thinking. I have been walking wide,
leaping on the hill-tops, since the grey dawn began, nosing wind and
weather, wet grass underfoot, wet sky above me. I wakened Goldberry
singing under window; but naught wakes hobbit-folk in the early
morning. In the night little folk wake up in the darkness, and sleep
after light has come! Ring a ding dillo! Wake now, my merry friends!
Forget the nightly noises! Ring a ding dillo del! derry del, my hearties!
If you come soon you’ll ﬁnd breakfast on the table. If you come late
you’ll get grass and rain-water!’
Needless to say – not that Tom’s threat sounded very serious –

the hobbits came soon, and left the table late and only when it was
beginning to look rather empty. Neither Tom nor Goldberry were
there. Tom could be heard about the house, clattering in the kitchen,
and up and down the stairs, and singing here and there outside. The
room looked westward over the mist-clouded valley, and the window
was open. Water dripped down from the thatched eaves above. Before
they had ﬁnished breakfast the clouds had joined into an unbroken
roof, and a straight grey rain came softly and steadily down. Behind
its deep curtain the Forest was completely veiled.
As they looked out of the window there came falling gently as if
it was ﬂowing down the rain out of the sky, the clear voice of Gold-
berry singing up above them. They could hear few words, but it
seemed plain to them that the song was a rain-song, as sweet as
showers on dry hills, that told the tale of a river from the spring in
the highlands to the Sea far below. The hobbits listened with delight;
and Frodo was glad in his heart, and blessed the kindly weather,
because it delayed them from departing. The thought of going had
been heavy upon him from the moment he awoke; but he guessed
now that they would not go further that day.
The upper wind settled in the West and deeper and wetter clouds
rolled up to spill their laden rain on the bare heads of the Downs.
Nothing could be seen all round the house but falling water. Frodo
stood near the open door and watched the white chalky path turn
into a little river of milk and go bubbling away down into the valley.
Tom Bombadil came trotting round the corner of the house, waving
his arms as if he was warding off the rain – and indeed when he
sprang over the threshold he seemed quite dry, except for his boots.
These he took off and put in the chimney-corner. Then he sat in the
largest chair and called the hobbits to gather round him.
‘This is Goldberry’s washing day,’ he said, ‘and her autumn-
cleaning. Too wet for hobbit-folk – let them rest while they are able!
It’s a good day for long tales, for questions and for answers, so Tom
will start the talking.’
He then told them many remarkable stories, sometimes half as if
speaking to himself, sometimes looking at them suddenly with a
bright blue eye under his deep brows. Often his voice would turn to
song, and he would get out of his chair and dance about. He told
them tales of bees and ﬂowers, the ways of trees, and the strange
creatures of the Forest, about the evil things and good things, things
friendly and things unfriendly, cruel things and kind things, and
secrets hidden under brambles.
As they listened, they began to understand the lives of the Forest,
apart from themselves, indeed to feel themselves as the strangers

where all other things were at home. Moving constantly in and out
of his talk was Old Man Willow, and Frodo learned now enough to
content him, indeed more than enough, for it was not comfortable
lore. Tom’s words laid bare the hearts of trees and their thoughts,
which were often dark and strange, and ﬁlled with a hatred of things
that go free upon the earth, gnawing, biting, breaking, hacking, burn-
ing: destroyers and usurpers. It was not called the Old Forest without
reason, for it was indeed ancient, a survivor of vast forgotten woods;
and in it there lived yet, ageing no quicker than the hills, the fathers
of the fathers of trees, remembering times when they were lords. The
countless years had ﬁlled them with pride and rooted wisdom, and
with malice. But none were more dangerous than the Great Willow:
his heart was rotten, but his strength was green; and he was cunning,
and a master of winds, and his song and thought ran through the
woods on both sides of the river. His grey thirsty spirit drew power
out of the earth and spread like ﬁne root-threads in the ground, and
invisible twig-ﬁngers in the air, till it had under its dominion nearly
all the trees of the Forest from the Hedge to the Downs.
Suddenly Tom’s talk left the woods and went leaping up the young
stream, over bubbling waterfalls, over pebbles and worn rocks, and
among small ﬂowers in close grass and wet crannies, wandering at
last up on to the Downs. They heard of the Great Barrows, and the
green mounds, and the stone-rings upon the hills and in the hollows
among the hills. Sheep were bleating in ﬂocks. Green walls and white
walls rose. There were fortresses on the heights. Kings of little king-
doms fought together, and the young Sun shone like ﬁre on the red
metal of their new and greedy swords. There was victory and defeat;
and towers fell, fortresses were burned, and ﬂames went up into the
sky. Gold was piled on the biers of dead kings and queens; and
mounds covered them, and the stone doors were shut; and the grass
grew over all. Sheep walked for a while biting the grass, but soon the
hills were empty again. A shadow came out of dark places far away,
and the bones were stirred in the mounds. Barrow-wights walked in
the hollow places with a clink of rings on cold ﬁngers, and gold chains
in the wind. Stone rings grinned out of the ground like broken teeth
in the moonlight.
The hobbits shuddered. Even in the Shire the rumour of the
Barrow-wights of the Barrow-downs beyond the Forest had been
heard. But it was not a tale that any hobbit liked to listen to, even
by a comfortable ﬁreside far away. These four now suddenly re-
membered what the joy of this house had driven from their minds:
the house of Tom Bombadil nestled under the very shoulder of those
dreaded hills. They lost the thread of his tale and shifted uneasily,
looking aside at one another.

When they caught his words again they found that he had now
wandered into strange regions beyond their memory and beyond their
waking thought, into times when the world was wider, and the seas
ﬂowed straight to the western Shore; and still on and back Tom went
singing out into ancient starlight, when only the Elf-sires were awake.
Then suddenly he stopped, and they saw that he nodded as if he was
falling asleep. The hobbits sat still before him, enchanted; and it
seemed as if, under the spell of his words, the wind had gone, and
the clouds had dried up, and the day had been withdrawn, and
darkness had come from East and West, and all the sky was ﬁlled
with the light of white stars.
Whether the morning and evening of one day or of many days
had passed Frodo could not tell. He did not feel either hungry or
tired, only ﬁlled with wonder. The stars shone through the window
and the silence of the heavens seemed to be round him. He spoke
at last out of his wonder and a sudden fear of that silence:
‘Who are you, Master?’ he asked.
‘Eh, what?’ said Tom sitting up, and his eyes glinting in the gloom.
‘Don’t you know my name yet? That’s the only answer. Tell me,
who are you, alone, yourself and nameless? But you are young and
I am old. Eldest, that’s what I am. Mark my words, my friends: Tom
was here before the river and the trees; Tom remembers the ﬁrst
raindrop and the ﬁrst acorn. He made paths before the Big People,
and saw the little People arriving. He was here before the Kings and
the graves and the Barrow-wights. When the Elves passed westward,
Tom was here already, before the seas were bent. He knew the dark
under the stars when it was fearless – before the Dark Lord came
from Outside.’
A shadow seemed to pass by the window, and the hobbits glanced
hastily through the panes. When they turned again, Goldberry stood
in the door behind, framed in light. She held a candle, shielding its
ﬂame from the draught with her hand; and the light ﬂowed through
it, like sunlight through a white shell.
‘The rain has ended,’ she said; ‘and new waters are running down-
hill, under the stars. Let us now laugh and be glad!’
‘And let us have food and drink!’ cried Tom. ‘Long tales are thirsty.
And long listening’s hungry work, morning, noon, and evening!’ With
that he jumped out of his chair, and with a bound took a candle from
the chimney-shelf and lit it in the ﬂame that Goldberry held; then
he danced about the table. Suddenly he hopped through the door
and disappeared.
Quickly he returned, bearing a large and laden tray. Then Tom
and Goldberry set the table; and the hobbits sat half in wonder and
half in laughter: so fair was the grace of Goldberry and so merry and

odd the caperings of Tom. Yet in some fashion they seemed to weave
a single dance, neither hindering the other, in and out of the room,
and round about the table; and with great speed food and vessels and
lights were set in order. The boards blazed with candles, white and
yellow. Tom bowed to his guests. ‘Supper is ready,’ said Goldberry;
and now the hobbits saw that she was clothed all in silver with a
white girdle, and her shoes were like ﬁshes’ mail. But Tom was all
in clean blue, blue as rain-washed forget-me-nots, and he had green
stockings.
It was a supper even better than before. The hobbits under the
spell of Tom’s words may have missed one meal or many, but when
the food was before them it seemed at least a week since they had
eaten. They did not sing or even speak much for a while, and paid
close attention to business. But after a time their hearts and spirits
rose high again, and their voices rang out in mirth and laughter.
After they had eaten, Goldberry sang many songs for them, songs
that began merrily in the hills and fell softly down into silence; and
in the silences they saw in their minds pools and waters wider than
any they had known, and looking into them they saw the sky below
them and the stars like jewels in the depths. Then once more she
wished them each good night and left them by the ﬁreside. But Tom
now seemed wide awake and plied them with questions.
He appeared already to know much about them and all their
families, and indeed to know much of all the history and doings of
the Shire down from days hardly remembered among the hobbits
themselves. It no longer surprised them; but he made no secret that
he owed his recent knowledge largely to Farmer Maggot, whom he
seemed to regard as a person of more importance than they had
imagined. ‘There’s earth under his old feet, and clay on his ﬁngers;
wisdom in his bones, and both his eyes are open,’ said Tom. It was
also clear that Tom had dealings with the Elves, and it seemed that
in some fashion, news had reached him from Gildor concerning the
ﬂight of Frodo.
Indeed so much did Tom know, and so cunning was his question-
ing, that Frodo found himself telling him more about Bilbo and his
own hopes and fears than he had told before even to Gandalf. Tom
wagged his head up and down, and there was a glint in his eyes when
he heard of the Riders.
‘Show me the precious Ring!’ he said suddenly in the midst of the
story: and Frodo, to his own astonishment, drew out the chain from
his pocket, and unfastening the Ring handed it at once to Tom.
It seemed to grow larger as it lay for a moment on his big brown-
skinned hand. Then suddenly he put it to his eye and laughed. For

a second the hobbits had a vision, both comical and alarming, of his
bright blue eye gleaming through a circle of gold. Then Tom put the
Ring round the end of his little ﬁnger and held it up to the candlelight.
For a moment the hobbits noticed nothing strange about this. Then
they gasped. There was no sign of Tom disappearing!
Tom laughed again, and then he spun the Ring in the air – and
it vanished with a ﬂash. Frodo gave a cry – and Tom leaned forward
and handed it back to him with a smile.
Frodo looked at it closely, and rather suspiciously (like one who
has lent a trinket to a juggler). It was the same Ring, or looked the
same and weighed the same: for that Ring had always seemed to
Frodo to weigh strangely heavy in the hand. But something prompted
him to make sure. He was perhaps a triﬂe annoyed with Tom for
seeming to make so light of what even Gandalf thought so perilously
important. He waited for an opportunity, when the talk was going
again, and Tom was telling an absurd story about badgers and their
queer ways – then he slipped the Ring on.
Merry turned towards him to say something and gave a start, and
checked an exclamation. Frodo was delighted (in a way): it was his
own ring all right, for Merry was staring blankly at his chair, and
obviously could not see him. He got up and crept quietly away from
the ﬁreside towards the outer door.
‘Hey there!’ cried Tom, glancing towards him with a most seeing
look in his shining eyes. ‘Hey! Come Frodo, there! Where be you
a-going? Old Tom Bombadil’s not as blind as that yet. Take off your
golden ring! Your hand’s more fair without it. Come back! Leave
your game and sit down beside me! We must talk a while more, and
think about the morning. Tom must teach the right road, and keep
your feet from wandering.’
Frodo laughed (trying to feel pleased), and taking off the Ring he
came and sat down again. Tom now told them that he reckoned the
Sun would shine tomorrow, and it would be a glad morning, and
setting out would be hopeful. But they would do well to start early;
for weather in that country was a thing that even Tom could not be
sure of for long, and it would change sometimes quicker than he
could change his jacket. ‘I am no weather-master,’ said he; ‘nor is
aught that goes on two legs.’
By his advice they decided to make nearly due North from his
house, over the western and lower slopes of the Downs: they might
hope in that way to strike the East Road in a day’s journey, and avoid
the Barrows. He told them not to be afraid – but to mind their own
business.
‘Keep to the green grass. Don’t you go a-meddling with old stone
or cold Wights or prying in their houses, unless you be strong folk

with hearts that never falter!’ He said this more than once; and he
advised them to pass barrows by on the west-side, if they chanced
to stray near one. Then he taught them a rhyme to sing, if they
should by ill-luck fall into any danger or difﬁculty the next day.
Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo!
By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,
By ﬁre, sun and moon, harken now and hear us!
Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us!
When they had sung this altogether after him, he clapped them
each on the shoulder with a laugh, and taking candles led them back
to their bedroom.

Chapter 8
F O G  O N  T H E  B A R R O W - D O W N S
That night they heard no noises. But either in his dreams or out of
them, he could not tell which, Frodo heard a sweet singing running
in his mind: a song that seemed to come like a pale light behind a
grey rain-curtain, and growing stronger to turn the veil all to glass
and silver, until at last it was rolled back, and a far green country
opened before him under a swift sunrise.
The vision melted into waking; and there was Tom whistling like
a tree-full of birds; and the sun was already slanting down the hill
and through the open window. Outside everything was green and
pale gold.
After breakfast, which they again ate alone, they made ready to
say farewell, as nearly heavy of heart as was possible on such a morn-
ing: cool, bright, and clean under a washed autumn sky of thin blue.
The air came fresh from the North-west. Their quiet ponies were
almost frisky, snifﬁng and moving restlessly. Tom came out of the
house and waved his hat and danced upon the doorstep, bidding the
hobbits to get up and be off and go with good speed.
They rode off along a path that wound away from behind the
house, and went slanting up towards the north end of the hill-brow
under which it sheltered. They had just dismounted to lead their
ponies up the last steep slope, when suddenly Frodo stopped.
‘Goldberry!’ he cried. ‘My fair lady, clad all in silver green! We
have never said farewell to her, nor seen her since the evening!’ He
was so distressed that he turned back; but at that moment a clear
call came rippling down. There on the hill-brow she stood beckoning
to them: her hair was ﬂying loose, and as it caught the sun it shone
and shimmered. A light like the glint of water on dewy grass ﬂashed
from under her feet as she danced.
They hastened up the last slope, and stood breathless beside her.
They bowed, but with a wave of her arm she bade them look round;
and they looked out from the hill-top over lands under the morning.
It was now as clear and far-seen as it had been veiled and misty when
they stood upon the knoll in the Forest, which could now be seen
rising pale and green out of the dark trees in the West. In that
direction the land rose in wooded ridges, green, yellow, russet under
the sun, beyond which lay hidden the valley of the Brandywine. To
the South, over the line of the Withywindle, there was a distant glint
like pale glass where the Brandywine River made a great loop in

the lowlands and ﬂowed away out of the knowledge of the hobbits.
Northward beyond the dwindling downs the land ran away in ﬂats
and swellings of grey and green and pale earth-colours, until it faded
into a featureless and shadowy distance. Eastward the Barrow-downs
rose, ridge behind ridge into the morning, and vanished out of eye-
sight into a guess: it was no more than a guess of blue and a remote
white glimmer blending with the hem of the sky, but it spoke to
them, out of memory and old tales, of the high and distant mountains.
They took a deep draught of the air, and felt that a skip and a
few stout strides would bear them wherever they wished. It seemed
fainthearted to go jogging aside over the crumpled skirts of the downs
towards the Road, when they should be leaping, as lusty as Tom,
over the stepping stones of the hills straight towards the Mountains.
Goldberry spoke to them and recalled their eyes and thoughts.
‘Speed now, fair guests!’ she said. ‘And hold to your purpose! North
with the wind in the left eye and a blessing on your footsteps! Make
haste while the Sun shines!’ And to Frodo she said: ‘Farewell, Elf-
friend, it was a merry meeting!’
But Frodo found no words to answer. He bowed low, and mounted
his pony, and followed by his friends jogged slowly down the gentle
slope behind the hill. Tom Bombadil’s house and the valley, and the
Forest were lost to view. The air grew warmer between the green
walls of hillside and hillside, and the scent of turf rose strong and
sweet as they breathed. Turning back, when they reached the bottom
of the green hollow, they saw Goldberry, now small and slender like
a sunlit ﬂower against the sky: she was standing still watching them,
and her hands were stretched out towards them. As they looked she
gave a clear call, and lifting up her hand she turned and vanished
behind the hill.
Their way wound along the ﬂoor of the hollow, and round the
green feet of a steep hill into another deeper and broader valley, and
then over the shoulders of further hills, and down their long limbs,
and up their smooth sides again, up on to new hill-tops and down
into new valleys. There was no tree nor any visible water: it was a
country of grass and short springy turf, silent except for the whisper
of the air over the edges of the land, and high lonely cries of strange
birds. As they journeyed the sun mounted, and grew hot. Each time
they climbed a ridge the breeze seemed to have grown less. When
they caught a glimpse of the country westward the distant Forest
seemed to be smoking, as if the fallen rain was steaming up again
from leaf and root and mould. A shadow now lay round the edge of
sight, a dark haze above which the upper sky was like a blue cap, hot
and heavy.

About mid-day they came to a hill whose top was wide and ﬂat-
tened, like a shallow saucer with a green mounded rim. Inside there
was no air stirring, and the sky seemed near their heads. They rode
across and looked northwards. Then their hearts rose; for it seemed
plain that they had come further already than they had expected.
Certainly the distances had now all become hazy and deceptive, but
there could be no doubt that the Downs were coming to an end. A
long valley lay below them winding away northwards, until it came
to an opening between two steep shoulders. Beyond, there seemed
to be no more hills. Due north they faintly glimpsed a long dark line.
‘That is a line of trees,’ said Merry, ‘and that must mark the Road.
All along it for many leagues east of the Bridge there are trees growing.
Some say they were planted in the old days.’
‘Splendid!’ said Frodo. ‘If we make as good going this afternoon
as we have done this morning, we shall have left the Downs before
the Sun sets and be jogging on in search of a camping place.’ But
even as he spoke he turned his glance eastwards, and he saw that on
that side the hills were higher and looked down upon them; and all
those hills were crowned with green mounds, and on some were
standing stones, pointing upwards like jagged teeth out of green gums.
That view was somehow disquieting; so they turned from the sight
and went down into the hollow circle. In the midst of it there stood
a single stone, standing tall under the sun above, and at this hour
casting no shadow. It was shapeless and yet signiﬁcant: like a land-
mark, or a guarding ﬁnger, or more like a warning. But they were
now hungry, and the sun was still at the fearless noon; so they set
their backs against the east side of the stone. It was cool, as if the
sun had had no power to warm it; but at that time this seemed
pleasant. There they took food and drink, and made as good a noon-
meal under the open sky as anyone could wish; for the food came
from ‘down under Hill’. Tom had provided them with plenty for the
comfort of the day. Their ponies unburdened strayed upon the grass.
Riding over the hills, and eating their ﬁll, the warm sun and the
scent of turf, lying a little too long, stretching out their legs and
looking at the sky above their noses: these things are, perhaps, enough
to explain what happened. However that may be: they woke suddenly
and uncomfortably from a sleep they had never meant to take. The
standing stone was cold, and it cast a long pale shadow that stretched
eastward over them. The sun, a pale and watery yellow, was gleaming
through the mist just above the west wall of the hollow in which they
lay; north, south, and east, beyond the wall the fog was thick, cold
and white. The air was silent, heavy and chill. Their ponies were
standing crowded together with their heads down.

The hobbits sprang to their feet in alarm, and ran to the western
rim. They found that they were upon an island in the fog. Even as
they looked out in dismay towards the setting sun, it sank before
their eyes into a white sea, and a cold grey shadow sprang up in the
East behind. The fog rolled up to the walls and rose above them,
and as it mounted it bent over their heads until it became a roof:
they were shut in a hall of mist whose central pillar was the standing
stone.
They felt as if a trap was closing about them; but they did not
quite lose heart. They still remembered the hopeful view they had
had of the line of the Road ahead, and they still knew in which
direction it lay. In any case, they now had so great a dislike for that
hollow place about the stone that no thought of remaining there was
in their minds. They packed up as quickly as their chilled ﬁngers
would work.
Soon they were leading their ponies in single ﬁle over the rim and
down the long northward slope of the hill, down into a foggy sea. As
they went down the mist became colder and damper, and their hair
hung lank and dripping on their foreheads. When they reached the
bottom it was so chill that they halted and got out cloaks and hoods,
which soon became bedewed with grey drops. Then, mounting their
ponies, they went slowly on again, feeling their way by the rise and
fall of the ground. They were steering, as well as they could guess,
for the gate-like opening at the far northward end of the long valley
which they had seen in the morning. Once they were through the
gap, they had only to keep on in anything like a straight line and they
were bound in the end to strike the Road. Their thoughts did not go
beyond that, except for a vague hope that perhaps away beyond the
Downs there might be no fog.
Their going was very slow. To prevent their getting separated and
wandering in different directions they went in ﬁle, with Frodo leading.
Sam was behind him, and after him came Pippin, and then Merry.
The valley seemed to stretch on endlessly. Suddenly Frodo saw a
hopeful sign. On either side ahead a darkness began to loom through
the mist; and he guessed that they were at last approaching the gap
in the hills, the north-gate of the Barrow-downs. If they could pass
that, they would be free.
‘Come on! Follow me!’ he called back over his shoulder, and he
hurried forward. But his hope soon changed to bewilderment and
alarm. The dark patches grew darker, but they shrank; and suddenly
he saw, towering ominous before him and leaning slightly towards
one another like the pillars of a headless door, two huge standing
stones. He could not remember having seen any sign of these in the

valley, when he looked out from the hill in the morning. He had
passed between them almost before he was aware: and even as he
did so darkness seemed to fall round him. His pony reared and
snorted, and he fell off. When he looked back he found that he was
alone: the others had not followed him.
‘Sam!’ he called. ‘Pippin! Merry! Come along! Why don’t you
keep up?’
There was no answer. Fear took him, and he ran back past the
stones shouting wildly: ‘Sam! Sam! Merry! Pippin!’ The pony bolted
into the mist and vanished. From some way off, or so it seemed, he
thought he heard a cry: ‘Hoy! Frodo! Hoy!’ It was away eastward,
on his left as he stood under the great stones, staring and straining
into the gloom. He plunged off in the direction of the call, and found
himself going steeply uphill.
As he struggled on he called again, and kept on calling more and
more frantically; but he heard no answer for some time, and then it
seemed faint and far ahead and high above him. ‘Frodo! Hoy!’ came
the thin voices out of the mist: and then a cry that sounded like help,
help! often repeated, ending with a last help! that trailed off into a
long wail suddenly cut short. He stumbled forward with all the speed
he could towards the cries; but the light was now gone, and clinging
night had closed about him, so that it was impossible to be sure of
any direction. He seemed all the time to be climbing up and up.
Only the change in the level of the ground at his feet told him
when he at last came to the top of a ridge or hill. He was weary,
sweating and yet chilled. It was wholly dark.
‘Where are you?’ he cried out miserably.
There was no reply. He stood listening. He was suddenly aware
that it was getting very cold, and that up here a wind was beginning
to blow, an icy wind. A change was coming in the weather. The mist
was ﬂowing past him now in shreds and tatters. His breath was
smoking, and the darkness was less near and thick. He looked up
and saw with surprise that faint stars were appearing overhead amid
the strands of hurrying cloud and fog. The wind began to hiss over
the grass.
He imagined suddenly that he caught a mufﬂed cry, and he made
towards it; and even as he went forward the mist was rolled up and
thrust aside, and the starry sky was unveiled. A glance showed him
that he was now facing southwards and was on a round hill-top,
which he must have climbed from the north. Out of the east the
biting wind was blowing. To his right there loomed against the west-
ward stars a dark black shape. A great barrow stood there.
‘Where are you?’ he cried again, both angry and afraid.

‘Here!’ said a voice, deep and cold, that seemed to come out of
the ground. ‘I am waiting for you!’
‘No!’ said Frodo; but he did not run away. His knees gave, and
he fell on the ground. Nothing happened, and there was no sound.
Trembling he looked up, in time to see a tall dark ﬁgure like a shadow
against the stars. It leaned over him. He thought there were two eyes,
very cold though lit with a pale light that seemed to come from some
remote distance. Then a grip stronger and colder than iron seized
him. The icy touch froze his bones, and he remembered no more.
When he came to himself again, for a moment he could recall
nothing except a sense of dread. Then suddenly he knew that he was
imprisoned, caught hopelessly; he was in a barrow. A Barrow-wight
had taken him, and he was probably already under the dreadful spells
of the Barrow-wights about which whispered tales spoke. He dared
not move, but lay as he found himself: ﬂat on his back upon a cold
stone with his hands on his breast.
But though his fear was so great that it seemed to be part of the
very darkness that was round him, he found himself as he lay thinking
about Bilbo Baggins and his stories, of their jogging along together
in the lanes of the Shire and talking about roads and adventures.
There is a seed of courage hidden (often deeply, it is true) in the
heart of the fattest and most timid hobbit, waiting for some ﬁnal and
desperate danger to make it grow. Frodo was neither very fat nor
very timid; indeed, though he did not know it, Bilbo (and Gandalf )
had thought him the best hobbit in the Shire. He thought he had
come to the end of his adventure, and a terrible end, but the thought
hardened him. He found himself stiffening, as if for a ﬁnal spring;
he no longer felt limp like a helpless prey.
As he lay there, thinking and getting a hold of himself, he noticed
all at once that the darkness was slowly giving way: a pale greenish
light was growing round him. It did not at ﬁrst show him what kind
of a place he was in, for the light seemed to be coming out of himself,
and from the ﬂoor beside him, and had not yet reached the roof or
wall. He turned, and there in the cold glow he saw lying beside him
Sam, Pippin, and Merry. They were on their backs, and their faces
looked deathly pale; and they were clad in white. About them lay
many treasures, of gold maybe, though in that light they looked cold
and unlovely. On their heads were circlets, gold chains were about
their waists, and on their ﬁngers were many rings. Swords lay by
their sides, and shields were at their feet. But across their three necks
lay one long naked sword.
*
*
*

Suddenly a song began: a cold murmur, rising and falling. The
voice seemed far away and immeasurably dreary, sometimes high in
the air and thin, sometimes like a low moan from the ground. Out
of the formless stream of sad but horrible sounds, strings of words
would now and again shape themselves: grim, hard, cold words,
heartless and miserable. The night was railing against the morning
of which it was bereaved, and the cold was cursing the warmth for
which it hungered. Frodo was chilled to the marrow. After a while
the song became clearer, and with dread in his heart he perceived
that it had changed into an incantation:
Cold be hand and heart and bone,
and cold be sleep under stone:
never more to wake on stony bed,
never, till the Sun fails and the Moon is dead.
In the black wind the stars shall die,
and still on gold here let them lie,
till the dark lord lifts his hand
over dead sea and withered land.
He heard behind his head a creaking and scraping sound. Raising
himself on one arm he looked, and saw now in the pale light that
they were in a kind of passage which behind them turned a corner.
Round the corner a long arm was groping, walking on its ﬁngers
towards Sam, who was lying nearest, and towards the hilt of the
sword that lay upon him.
At ﬁrst Frodo felt as if he had indeed been turned into stone by
the incantation. Then a wild thought of escape came to him. He
wondered if he put on the Ring, whether the Barrow-wight would
miss him, and he might ﬁnd some way out. He thought of himself
running free over the grass, grieving for Merry, and Sam, and Pippin,
but free and alive himself. Gandalf would admit that there had been
nothing else he could do.
But the courage that had been awakened in him was now too
strong: he could not leave his friends so easily. He wavered, groping
in his pocket, and then fought with himself again; and as he did so
the arm crept nearer. Suddenly resolve hardened in him, and he
seized a short sword that lay beside him, and kneeling he stooped
low over the bodies of his companions. With what strength he had
he hewed at the crawling arm near the wrist, and the hand broke off;
but at the same moment the sword splintered up to the hilt. There
was a shriek and the light vanished. In the dark there was a snarling
noise.
Frodo fell forward over Merry, and Merry’s face felt cold. All at

once back into his mind, from which it had disappeared with the ﬁrst
coming of the fog, came the memory of the house down under the
Hill, and of Tom singing. He remembered the rhyme that Tom had
taught them. In a small desperate voice he began: Ho! Tom Bombadil!
and with that name his voice seemed to grow strong: it had a full
and lively sound, and the dark chamber echoed as if to drum and
trumpet.
Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo!
By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,
By ﬁre, sun and moon, harken now and hear us!
Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us!
There was a sudden deep silence, in which Frodo could hear his
heart beating. After a long slow moment he heard plain, but far away,
as if it was coming down through the ground or through thick walls,
an answering voice singing:
Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow,
Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow.
None has ever caught him yet, for Tom, he is the master:
His songs are stronger songs, and his feet are faster.
There was a loud rumbling sound, as of stones rolling and falling,
and suddenly light streamed in, real light, the plain light of day. A
low door-like opening appeared at the end of the chamber beyond
Frodo’s feet; and there was Tom’s head (hat, feather, and all) framed
against the light of the sun rising red behind him. The light fell upon
the ﬂoor, and upon the faces of the three hobbits lying beside Frodo.
They did not stir, but the sickly hue had left them. They looked now
as if they were only very deeply asleep.
Tom stooped, removed his hat, and came into the dark chamber,
singing:
Get out, you old Wight! Vanish in the sunlight!
Shrivel like the cold mist, like the winds go wailing,
Out into the barren lands far beyond the mountains!
Come never here again! Leave your barrow empty!
Lost and forgotten be, darker than the darkness,
Where gates stand for ever shut, till the world is mended.
At these words there was a cry and part of the inner end of the
chamber fell in with a crash. Then there was a long trailing shriek,
fading away into an unguessable distance; and after that silence.

‘Come, friend Frodo!’ said Tom. ‘Let us get out on to clean grass!
You must help me bear them.’
Together they carried out Merry, Pippin, and Sam. As Frodo left
the barrow for the last time he thought he saw a severed hand wrig-
gling still, like a wounded spider, in a heap of fallen earth. Tom went
back in again, and there was a sound of much thumping and stamp-
ing. When he came out he was bearing in his arms a great load of
treasure: things of gold, silver, copper, and bronze; many beads and
chains and jewelled ornaments. He climbed the green barrow and
laid them all on top in the sunshine.
There he stood, with his hat in his hand and the wind in his hair,
and looked down upon the three hobbits, that had been laid on their
backs upon the grass at the west side of the mound. Raising his right
hand he said in a clear and commanding voice:
Wake now my merry lads! Wake and hear me calling!
Warm now be heart and limb! The cold stone is fallen;
Dark door is standing wide; dead hand is broken.
Night under Night is ﬂown, and the Gate is open!
To Frodo’s great joy the hobbits stirred, stretched their arms,
rubbed their eyes, and then suddenly sprang up. They looked about
in amazement, ﬁrst at Frodo, and then at Tom standing large as life
on the barrow-top above them; and then at themselves in their thin
white rags, crowned and belted with pale gold, and jingling with
trinkets.
‘What in the name of wonder?’ began Merry, feeling the golden
circlet that had slipped over one eye. Then he stopped, and a shadow
came over his face, and he closed his eyes. ‘Of course, I remember!’
he said. ‘The men of Carn Duˆ m came on us at night, and we were
worsted. Ah! the spear in my heart!’ He clutched at his breast. ‘No!
No!’ he said, opening his eyes. ‘What am I saying? I have been
dreaming. Where did you get to, Frodo?’
‘I thought that I was lost,’ said Frodo; ‘but I don’t want to speak
of it. Let us think of what we are to do now! Let us go on!’
‘Dressed up like this, sir?’ said Sam. ‘Where are my clothes?’
He ﬂung his circlet, belt, and rings on the grass, and looked round
helplessly, as if he expected to ﬁnd his cloak, jacket, and breeches,
and other hobbit-garments lying somewhere to hand.
‘You won’t ﬁnd your clothes again,’ said Tom, bounding down
from the mound, and laughing as he danced round them in the
sunlight. One would have thought that nothing dangerous or dreadful
had happened; and indeed the horror faded out of their hearts as
they looked at him, and saw the merry glint in his eyes.

‘What do you mean?’ asked Pippin, looking at him, half puzzled
and half amused. ‘Why not?’
But Tom shook his head, saying: ‘You’ve found yourselves again,
out of the deep water. Clothes are but little loss, if you escape from
drowning. Be glad, my merry friends, and let the warm sunlight heat
now heart and limb! Cast off these cold rags! Run naked on the grass,
while Tom goes a-hunting!’
He sprang away down hill, whistling and calling. Looking down
after him Frodo saw him running away southwards along the green
hollow between their hill and the next, still whistling and crying:
Hey! now! Come hoy now! Whither do you wander?
Up, down, near or far, here, there or yonder?
Sharp-ears, Wise-nose, Swish-tail and Bumpkin,
White-socks my little lad, and old Fatty Lumpkin!
So he sang, running fast, tossing up his hat and catching it, until
he was hidden by a fold of the ground: but for some time his hey
now! hoy now! came ﬂoating back down the wind, which had shifted
round towards the south.
The air was growing very warm again. The hobbits ran about for
a while on the grass, as he told them. Then they lay basking in the
sun with the delight of those that have been wafted suddenly from
bitter winter to a friendly clime, or of people that, after being long
ill and bedridden, wake one day to ﬁnd that they are unexpectedly
well and the day is again full of promise.
By the time that Tom returned they were feeling strong (and
hungry). He reappeared, hat ﬁrst, over the brow of the hill, and be-
hind him came in an obedient line six ponies: their own ﬁve and one
more. The last was plainly old Fatty Lumpkin: he was larger, stronger,
fatter (and older) than their own ponies. Merry, to whom the others
belonged, had not, in fact, given them any such names, but they
answered to the new names that Tom had given them for the rest of
their lives. Tom called them one by one and they climbed over the
brow and stood in a line. Then Tom bowed to the hobbits.
‘Here are your ponies, now!’ he said. ‘They’ve more sense (in
some ways) than you wandering hobbits have – more sense in their
noses. For they sniff danger ahead which you walk right into; and if
they run to save themselves, then they run the right way. You must
forgive them all; for though their hearts are faithful, to face fear of
Barrow-wights is not what they were made for. See, here they come
again, bringing all their burdens!’
Merry, Sam, and Pippin now clothed themselves in spare garments

from their packs; and they soon felt too hot, for they were obliged
to put on some of the thicker and warmer things that they had brought
against the oncoming of winter.
‘Where does that other old animal, that Fatty Lumpkin, come
from?’ asked Frodo.
‘He’s mine,’ said Tom. ‘My four-legged friend; though I seldom
ride him, and he wanders often far, free upon the hillsides. When
your ponies stayed with me, they got to know my Lumpkin; and they
smelt him in the night, and quickly ran to meet him. I thought he’d
look for them and with his words of wisdom take all their fear away.
But now, my jolly Lumpkin, old Tom’s going to ride. Hey! he’s
coming with you, just to set you on the road; so he needs a pony.
For you cannot easily talk to hobbits that are riding, when you’re on
your own legs trying to trot beside them.’
The hobbits were delighted to hear this, and thanked Tom many
times; but he laughed, and said that they were so good at losing
themselves that he would not feel happy till he had seen them safe
over the borders of his land. ‘I’ve got things to do,’ he said: ‘my
making and my singing, my talking and my walking, and my watching
of the country. Tom can’t be always near to open doors and willow-
cracks. Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting.’
It was still fairly early by the sun, something between nine and
ten, and the hobbits turned their minds to food. Their last meal had
been lunch beside the standing stone the day before. They breakfasted
now off the remainder of Tom’s provisions, meant for their supper,
with additions that Tom had brought with him. It was not a large
meal (considering hobbits and the circumstances), but they felt much
better for it. While they were eating Tom went up to the mound,
and looked through the treasures. Most of these he made into a pile
that glistered and sparkled on the grass. He bade them lie there ‘free
to all ﬁnders, birds, beasts, Elves or Men, and all kindly creatures’;
for so the spell of the mound should be broken and scattered and
no Wight ever come back to it. He chose for himself from the pile a
brooch set with blue stones, many-shaded like ﬂax-ﬂowers or the
wings of blue butterﬂies. He looked long at it, as if stirred by some
memory, shaking his head, and saying at last:
‘Here is a pretty toy for Tom and for his lady! Fair was she who
long ago wore this on her shoulder. Goldberry shall wear it now, and
we will not forget her!’
For each of the hobbits he chose a dagger, long, leaf-shaped, and
keen, of marvellous workmanship, damasked with serpent-forms in
red and gold. They gleamed as he drew them from their black sheaths,
wrought of some strange metal, light and strong, and set with many

ﬁery stones. Whether by some virtue in these sheaths or because of
the spell that lay on the mound, the blades seemed untouched by
time, unrusted, sharp, glittering in the sun.
‘Old knives are long enough as swords for hobbit-people,’ he said.
‘Sharp blades are good to have, if Shire-folk go walking, east, south,
or far away into dark and danger.’ Then he told them that these
blades were forged many long years ago by Men of Westernesse: they
were foes of the Dark Lord, but they were overcome by the evil king
of Carn Duˆ m in the Land of Angmar.
‘Few now remember them,’ Tom murmured, ‘yet still some go
wandering, sons of forgotten kings walking in loneliness, guarding
from evil things folk that are heedless.’
The hobbits did not understand his words, but as he spoke they
had a vision as it were of a great expanse of years behind them, like
a vast shadowy plain over which there strode shapes of Men, tall and
grim with bright swords, and last came one with a star on his brow.
Then the vision faded, and they were back in the sunlit world. It was
time to start again. They made ready, packing their bags and lading
their ponies. Their new weapons they hung on their leather belts
under their jackets, feeling them very awkward, and wondering if
they would be of any use. Fighting had not before occurred to any
of them as one of the adventures in which their ﬂight would land
them.
At last they set off. They led their ponies down the hill; and then
mounting they trotted quickly along the valley. They looked back
and saw the top of the old mound on the hill, and from it the sunlight
on the gold went up like a yellow ﬂame. Then they turned a shoulder
of the Downs and it was hidden from view.
Though Frodo looked about him on every side he saw no sign of
the great stones standing like a gate, and before long they came to
the northern gap and rode swiftly through, and the land fell away
before them. It was a merry journey with Tom Bombadil trotting
gaily beside them, or before them, on Fatty Lumpkin, who could
move much faster than his girth promised. Tom sang most of the
time, but it was chieﬂy nonsense, or else perhaps a strange language
unknown to the hobbits, an ancient language whose words were
mainly those of wonder and delight.
They went forward steadily, but they soon saw that the Road was
further away than they had imagined. Even without a fog, their sleep
at mid-day would have prevented them from reaching it until after
nightfall on the day before. The dark line they had seen was not a
line of trees but a line of bushes growing on the edge of a deep dike
with a steep wall on the further side. Tom said that it had once been

the boundary of a kingdom, but a very long time ago. He seemed to
remember something sad about it, and would not say much.
They climbed down and out of the dike and through a gap in the
wall, and then Tom turned due north, for they had been bearing
somewhat to the west. The land was now open and fairly level, and
they quickened their pace, but the sun was already sinking low when
at last they saw a line of tall trees ahead, and they knew that they
had come back to the Road after many unexpected adventures. They
galloped their ponies over the last furlongs, and halted under the
long shadows of the trees. They were on the top of a sloping bank,
and the Road, now dim as evening drew on, wound away below
them. At this point it ran nearly from South-west to North-east, and
on their right it fell quickly down into a wide hollow. It was rutted
and bore many signs of the recent heavy rain; there were pools and
pot-holes full of water.
They rode down the bank and looked up and down. There was
nothing to be seen. ‘Well, here we are again at last!’ said Frodo. ‘I
suppose we haven’t lost more than two days by my short cut through
the Forest! But perhaps the delay will prove useful – it may have put
them off our trail.’
The others looked at him. The shadow of the fear of the Black
Riders came suddenly over them again. Ever since they had entered
the Forest they had thought chieﬂy of getting back to the Road; only
now when it lay beneath their feet did they remember the danger
which pursued them, and was more than likely to be lying in wait
for them upon the Road itself. They looked anxiously back towards
the setting sun, but the Road was brown and empty.
‘Do you think,’ asked Pippin hesitatingly, ‘do you think we may
be pursued, tonight?’
‘No, I hope not tonight,’ answered Tom Bombadil; ‘nor perhaps
the next day. But do not trust my guess; for I cannot tell for certain.
Out east my knowledge fails. Tom is not master of Riders from the
Black Land far beyond his country.’
All the same the hobbits wished he was coming with them. They
felt that he would know how to deal with Black Riders, if anyone
did. They would soon now be going forward into lands wholly strange
to them, and beyond all but the most vague and distant legends of
the Shire, and in the gathering twilight they longed for home. A deep
loneliness and sense of loss was on them. They stood silent, reluctant
to make the ﬁnal parting, and only slowly became aware that Tom
was wishing them farewell, and telling them to have good heart and
to ride on till dark without halting.
‘Tom will give you good advice, till this day is over (after that
your own luck must go with you and guide you): four miles along

the Road you’ll come upon a village, Bree under Bree-hill, with doors
looking westward. There you’ll ﬁnd an old inn that is called The
Prancing Pony. Barliman Butterbur is the worthy keeper. There you
can stay the night, and afterwards the morning will speed you upon
your way. Be bold, but wary! Keep up your merry hearts, and ride
to meet your fortune!’
They begged him to come at least as far as the inn and drink once
more with them; but he laughed and refused, saying:
Tom’s country ends here: he will not pass the borders.
Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting!
Then he turned, tossed up his hat, leaped on Lumpkin’s back, and
rode up over the bank and away singing into the dusk.
The hobbits climbed up and watched him until he was out of
sight.
‘I am sorry to take leave of Master Bombadil,’ said Sam. ‘He’s a
caution and no mistake. I reckon we may go a good deal further and
see naught better, nor queerer. But I won’t deny I’ll be glad to see
this Prancing Pony he spoke of. I hope it’ll be like The Green Dragon
away back home! What sort of folk are they in Bree?’
‘There are hobbits in Bree,’ said Merry, ‘as well as Big Folk. I
daresay it will be homelike enough. The Pony is a good inn by all
accounts. My people ride out there now and again.’
‘It may be all we could wish,’ said Frodo; ‘but it is outside the
Shire all the same. Don’t make yourselves too much at home! Please
remember – all of you – that the name of Baggins must not be
mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill, if any name must be given.’
They now mounted their ponies and rode off silently into the
evening. Darkness came down quickly, as they plodded slowly down-
hill and up again, until at last they saw lights twinkling some distance
ahead.
Before them rose Bree-hill barring the way, a dark mass against
misty stars; and under its western ﬂank nestled a large village.
Towards it they now hurried desiring only to ﬁnd a ﬁre, and a door
between them and the night.

Chapter 9
A T  T H E  S I G N  O F  T H E
P R A N C I N G  P O N Y
Bree was the chief village of the Bree-land, a small inhabited region,
like an island in the empty lands round about. Besides Bree itself,
there was Staddle on the other side of the hill, Combe in a deep
valley a little further eastward, and Archet on the edge of the Chet-
wood. Lying round Bree-hill and the villages was a small country of
ﬁelds and tamed woodland only a few miles broad.
The Men of Bree were brown-haired, broad, and rather short,
cheerful and independent: they belonged to nobody but themselves;
but they were more friendly and familiar with Hobbits, Dwarves,
Elves, and other inhabitants of the world about them than was (or
is) usual with Big People. According to their own tales they were the
original inhabitants and were the descendants of the ﬁrst Men that
ever wandered into the West of the middle-world. Few had survived
the turmoils of the Elder Days; but when the Kings returned again
over the Great Sea they had found the Bree-men still there, and they
were still there now, when the memory of the old Kings had faded
into the grass.
In those days no other Men had settled dwellings so far west, or
within a hundred leagues of the Shire. But in the wild lands beyond
Bree there were mysterious wanderers. The Bree-folk called them
Rangers, and knew nothing of their origin. They were taller and
darker than the Men of Bree and were believed to have strange powers
of sight and hearing, and to understand the languages of beasts and
birds. They roamed at will southwards, and eastwards even as far as
the Misty Mountains; but they were now few and rarely seen. When
they appeared they brought news from afar, and told strange forgotten
tales which were eagerly listened to; but the Bree-folk did not make
friends of them.
There were also many families of hobbits in the Bree-land; and
they claimed to be the oldest settlement of Hobbits in the world, one
that was founded long before even the Brandywine was crossed and
the Shire colonized. They lived mostly in Staddle though there were
some in Bree itself, especially on the higher slopes of the hill, above
the houses of the Men. The Big Folk and the Little Folk (as they
called one another) were on friendly terms, minding their own affairs
in their own ways, but both rightly regarding themselves as necessary

parts of the Bree-folk. Nowhere else in the world was this peculiar
(but excellent) arrangement to be found.
The Bree-folk, Big and Little, did not themselves travel much;
and the affairs of the four villages were their chief concern. Occasion-
ally the Hobbits of Bree went as far as Buckland, or the Eastfarthing;
but though their little land was not much further than a day’s riding
east of the Brandywine Bridge, the Hobbits of the Shire now seldom
visited it. An occasional Bucklander or adventurous Took would
come out to the Inn for a night or two, but even that was becoming
less and less usual. The Shire-hobbits referred to those of Bree, and
to any others that lived beyond the borders, as Outsiders, and took
very little interest in them, considering them dull and uncouth. There
were probably many more Outsiders scattered about in the West of
the World in those days than the people of the Shire imagined. Some,
doubtless, were no better than tramps, ready to dig a hole in any
bank and stay only as long as it suited them. But in the Bree-land,
at any rate, the hobbits were decent and prosperous, and no more
rustic than most of their distant relatives Inside. It was not yet forgot-
ten that there had been a time when there was much coming and
going between the Shire and Bree. There was Bree-blood in the
Brandybucks by all accounts.
The village of Bree had some hundred stone houses of the Big
Folk, mostly above the Road, nestling on the hillside with windows
looking west. On that side, running in more than half a circle from
the hill and back to it, there was a deep dike with a thick hedge on
the inner side. Over this the Road crossed by a causeway; but where
it pierced the hedge it was barred by a great gate. There was another
gate in the southern corner where the Road ran out of the village.
The gates were closed at nightfall; but just inside them were small
lodges for the gatekeepers.
Down on the Road, where it swept to the right to go round the
foot of the hill, there was a large inn. It had been built long ago when
the trafﬁc on the roads had been far greater. For Bree stood at an
old meeting of ways; another ancient road crossed the East Road just
outside the dike at the western end of the village, and in former days
Men and other folk of various sorts had travelled much on it. Strange
as News from Bree was still a saying in the Eastfarthing, descending
from those days, when news from North, South, and East could be
heard in the inn, and when the Shire-hobbits used to go more often
to hear it. But the Northern Lands had long been desolate, and
the North Road was now seldom used: it was grass-grown, and the
Bree-folk called it the Greenway.
The Inn of Bree was still there, however, and the innkeeper was

an important person. His house was a meeting place for the idle,
talkative, and inquisitive among the inhabitants, large and small, of
the four villages; and a resort of Rangers and other wanderers, and
for such travellers (mostly dwarves) as still journeyed on the East
Road, to and from the Mountains.
It was dark, and white stars were shining, when Frodo and his
companions came at last to the Greenway-crossing and drew near
the village. They came to the West-gate and found it shut; but at the
door of the lodge beyond it, there was a man sitting. He jumped up
and fetched a lantern and looked over the gate at them in surprise.
‘What do you want, and where do you come from?’ he asked
grufﬂy.
‘We are making for the inn here,’ answered Frodo. ‘We are jour-
neying east and cannot go further tonight.’
‘Hobbits! Four hobbits! And what’s more, out of the Shire by their
talk,’ said the gatekeeper, softly as if speaking to himself. He stared
at them darkly for a moment, and then slowly opened the gate and
let them ride through.
‘We don’t often see Shire-folk riding on the Road at night,’ he
went on, as they halted a moment by his door. ‘You’ll pardon my
wondering what business takes you away east of Bree! What may
your names be, might I ask?’
‘Our names and our business are our own, and this does not seem
a good place to discuss them,’ said Frodo, not liking the look of the
man or the tone of his voice.
‘Your business is your own, no doubt,’ said the man; ‘but it’s my
business to ask questions after nightfall.’
‘We are hobbits from Buckland, and we have a fancy to travel and
to stay at the inn here,’ put in Merry. ‘I am Mr. Brandybuck. Is that
enough for you? The Bree-folk used to be fair-spoken to travellers,
or so I had heard.’
‘All right, all right!’ said the man. ‘I meant no offence. But you’ll
ﬁnd maybe that more folk than old Harry at the gate will be asking
you questions. There’s queer folk about. If you go on to The Pony,
you’ll ﬁnd you’re not the only guests.’
He wished them good night, and they said no more; but Frodo
could see in the lantern-light that the man was still eyeing them
curiously. He was glad to hear the gate clang to behind them, as they
rode forward. He wondered why the man was so suspicious, and
whether anyone had been asking for news of a party of hobbits. Could
it have been Gandalf ? He might have arrived, while they were delayed
in the Forest and the Downs. But there was something in the look
and the voice of the gatekeeper that made him uneasy.

The man stared after the hobbits for a moment, and then he went
back to his house. As soon as his back was turned, a dark ﬁgure
climbed quickly in over the gate and melted into the shadows of the
village street.
The hobbits rode on up a gentle slope, passing a few detached
houses, and drew up outside the inn. The houses looked large and
strange to them. Sam stared up at the inn with its three storeys and
many windows, and felt his heart sink. He had imagined himself
meeting giants taller than trees, and other creatures even more terrify-
ing, some time or other in the course of his journey; but at the
moment he was ﬁnding his ﬁrst sight of Men and their tall houses
quite enough, indeed too much for the dark end of a tiring day. He
pictured black horses standing all saddled in the shadows of the
inn-yard, and Black Riders peering out of dark upper windows.
‘We surely aren’t going to stay here for the night, are we, sir?’ he
exclaimed. ‘If there are hobbit-folk in these parts, why don’t we look
for some that would be willing to take us in? It would be more
homelike.’
‘What’s wrong with the inn?’ said Frodo. ‘Tom Bombadil recom-
mended it. I expect it’s homelike enough inside.’
Even from the outside the inn looked a pleasant house to familiar
eyes. It had a front on the Road, and two wings running back on
land partly cut out of the lower slopes of the hill, so that at the rear
the second-ﬂoor windows were level with the ground. There was a
wide arch leading to a courtyard between the two wings, and on the
left under the arch there was a large doorway reached by a few broad
steps. The door was open and light streamed out of it. Above the
arch there was a lamp, and beneath it swung a large signboard: a fat
white pony reared up on its hind legs. Over the door was painted in
white letters: the prancing pony by barliman butterbur. Many
of the lower windows showed lights behind thick curtains.
As they hesitated outside in the gloom, someone began singing a
merry song inside, and many cheerful voices joined loudly in the
chorus. They listened to this encouraging sound for a moment and
then got off their ponies. The song ended and there was a burst of
laughter and clapping.
They led their ponies under the arch, and leaving them standing
in the yard they climbed up the steps. Frodo went forward and nearly
bumped into a short fat man with a bald head and a red face. He
had a white apron on, and was bustling out of one door and in
through another, carrying a tray laden with full mugs.
‘Can we——’ began Frodo.
‘Half a minute, if you please!’ shouted the man over his shoulder,

and vanished into a babel of voices and a cloud of smoke. In a
moment he was out again, wiping his hands on his apron.
‘Good evening, little master!’ he said, bending down. ‘What may
you be wanting?’
‘Beds for four, and stabling for ﬁve ponies, if that can be managed.
Are you Mr. Butterbur?’
‘That’s right! Barliman is my name. Barliman Butterbur at your
service! You’re from the Shire, eh?’ he said, and then suddenly he
clapped his hand to his forehead, as if trying to remember something.
‘Hobbits!’ he cried. ‘Now what does that remind me of ? Might I ask
your names, sirs?’
‘Mr. Took and Mr. Brandybuck,’ said Frodo; ‘and this is Sam
Gamgee. My name is Underhill.’
‘There now!’ said Mr. Butterbur, snapping his ﬁngers. ‘It’s gone
again! But it’ll come back, when I have time to think. I’m run off
my feet; but I’ll see what I can do for you. We don’t often get a party
out of the Shire nowadays, and I should be sorry not to make you
welcome. But there is such a crowd already in the house tonight as
there hasn’t been for long enough. It never rains but it pours, we say
in Bree.’
‘Hi! Nob!’ he shouted. ‘Where are you, you woolly-footed slow-
coach? Nob!’
‘Coming, sir! Coming!’ A cheery-looking hobbit bobbed out of a
door, and seeing the travellers, stopped short and stared at them with
great interest.
‘Where’s Bob?’ asked the landlord. ‘You don’t know? Well, ﬁnd
him! Double sharp! I haven’t got six legs, nor six eyes neither! Tell
Bob there’s ﬁve ponies that have to be stabled. He must ﬁnd room
somehow.’ Nob trotted off with a grin and a wink.
‘Well now, what was I going to say?’ said Mr. Butterbur, tapping
his forehead. ‘One thing drives out another, so to speak. I’m that
busy tonight, my head is going round. There’s a party that came up
the Greenway from down South last night – and that was strange
enough to begin with. Then there’s a travelling company of dwarves
going West come in this evening. And now there’s you. If you weren’t
hobbits, I doubt if we could house you. But we’ve got a room or two
in the north wing that were made special for hobbits, when this place
was built. On the ground ﬂoor as they usually prefer; round windows
and all as they like it. I hope you’ll be comfortable. You’ll be wanting
supper, I don’t doubt. As soon as may be. This way now!’
He led them a short way down a passage, and opened a door.
‘Here is a nice little parlour!’ he said. ‘I hope it will suit. Excuse me
now. I’m that busy. No time for talking. I must be trotting. It’s hard
work for two legs, but I don’t get thinner. I’ll look in again later. If

you want anything, ring the hand-bell, and Nob will come. If he
don’t come, ring and shout!’
Off he went at last, and left them feeling rather breathless. He
seemed capable of an endless stream of talk, however busy he might
be. They found themselves in a small and cosy room. There was a
bit of bright ﬁre burning on the hearth, and in front of it were some
low and comfortable chairs. There was a round table, already spread
with a white cloth, and on it was a large hand-bell. But Nob, the
hobbit servant, came bustling in long before they thought of ringing.
He brought candles and a tray full of plates.
‘Will you be wanting anything to drink, masters?’ he asked. ‘And
shall I show you the bedrooms, while your supper is got ready?’
They were washed and in the middle of good deep mugs of beer
when Mr. Butterbur and Nob came in again. In a twinkling the table
was laid. There was hot soup, cold meats, a blackberry tart, new loaves,
slabs of butter, and half a ripe cheese: good plain food, as good as
the Shire could show, and homelike enough to dispel the last of Sam’s
misgivings (already much relieved by the excellence of the beer).
The landlord hovered round for a little, and then prepared to leave
them. ‘I don’t know whether you would care to join the company,
when you have supped,’ he said, standing at the door. ‘Perhaps you
would rather go to your beds. Still the company would be very pleased
to welcome you, if you had a mind. We don’t get Outsiders – travellers
from the Shire, I should say, begging your pardon – often; and we
like to hear a bit of news, or any story or song you may have in mind.
But as you please! Ring the bell, if you lack anything!’
So refreshed and encouraged did they feel at the end of their
supper (about three quarters of an hour’s steady going, not hindered
by unnecessary talk) that Frodo, Pippin, and Sam decided to join
the company. Merry said it would be too stuffy. ‘I shall sit here
quietly by the ﬁre for a bit, and perhaps go out later for a sniff of
the air. Mind your Ps and Qs, and don’t forget that you are supposed
to be escaping in secret, and are still on the high-road and not very
far from the Shire!’
‘All right!’ said Pippin. ‘Mind yourself ! Don’t get lost, and don’t
forget that it is safer indoors!’
The company was in the big common-room of the inn. The gather-
ing was large and mixed, as Frodo discovered, when his eyes got
used to the light. This came chieﬂy from a blazing log-ﬁre, for the
three lamps hanging from the beams were dim, and half veiled in
smoke. Barliman Butterbur was standing near the ﬁre, talking to a
couple of dwarves and one or two strange-looking men. On the
benches were various folk: men of Bree, a collection of local hobbits

(sitting chattering together), a few more dwarves, and other vague
ﬁgures difﬁcult to make out away in the shadows and corners.
As soon as the Shire-hobbits entered, there was a chorus of wel-
come from the Bree-landers. The strangers, especially those that had
come up the Greenway, stared at them curiously. The landlord intro-
duced the newcomers to the Bree-folk, so quickly that, though they
caught many names, they were seldom sure who the names belonged
to. The Men of Bree seemed all to have rather botanical (and to the
Shire-folk rather odd) names, like Rushlight, Goatleaf, Heathertoes,
Appledore, Thistlewool and Ferny (not to mention Butterbur). Some
of the hobbits had similar names. The Mugworts, for instance,
seemed numerous. But most of them had natural names, such as
Banks, Brockhouse, Longholes, Sandheaver, and Tunnelly, many of
which were used in the Shire. There were several Underhills from
Staddle, and as they could not imagine sharing a name without being
related, they took Frodo to their hearts as a long-lost cousin.
The Bree-hobbits were, in fact, friendly and inquisitive, and Frodo
soon found that some explanation of what he was doing would have
to be given. He gave out that he was interested in history and geogra-
phy (at which there was much wagging of heads, although neither of
these words were much used in the Bree-dialect). He said he was
thinking of writing a book (at which there was silent astonishment),
and that he and his friends wanted to collect information about
hobbits living outside the Shire, especially in the eastern lands.
At this a chorus of voices broke out. If Frodo had really wanted
to write a book, and had had many ears, he would have learned
enough for several chapters in a few minutes. And if that was not
enough, he was given a whole list of names, beginning with ‘Old
Barliman here’, to whom he could go for further information. But
after a time, as Frodo did not show any sign of writing a book on
the spot, the hobbits returned to their questions about doings in the
Shire. Frodo did not prove very communicative, and he soon found
himself sitting alone in a corner, listening and looking around.
The Men and Dwarves were mostly talking of distant events and
telling news of a kind that was becoming only too familiar. There
was trouble away in the South, and it seemed that the Men who had
come up the Greenway were on the move, looking for lands where
they could ﬁnd some peace. The Bree-folk were sympathetic, but
plainly not very ready to take a large number of strangers into their
little land. One of the travellers, a squint-eyed ill-favoured fellow,
was foretelling that more and more people would be coming north
in the near future. ‘If room isn’t found for them, they’ll ﬁnd it for
themselves. They’ve a right to live, same as other folk,’ he said loudly.
The local inhabitants did not look pleased at the prospect.

The hobbits did not pay much attention to all this, as it did not
at the moment seem to concern hobbits. Big Folk could hardly beg
for lodgings in hobbit-holes. They were more interested in Sam and
Pippin, who were now feeling quite at home, and were chatting gaily
about events in the Shire. Pippin roused a good deal of laughter with
an account of the collapse of the roof of the Town Hole in Michel
Delving: Will Whitfoot, the Mayor, and the fattest hobbit in the
Westfarthing, had been buried in chalk, and came out like a ﬂoured
dumpling. But there were several questions asked that made Frodo
a little uneasy. One of the Bree-landers, who seemed to have been
in the Shire several times, wanted to know where the Underhills lived
and who they were related to.
Suddenly Frodo noticed that a strange-looking weather-beaten
man, sitting in the shadows near the wall, was also listening intently
to the hobbit-talk. He had a tall tankard in front of him, and was
smoking a long-stemmed pipe curiously carved. His legs were
stretched out before him, showing high boots of supple leather that
ﬁtted him well, but had seen much wear and were now caked with
mud. A travel-stained cloak of heavy dark-green cloth was drawn
close about him, and in spite of the heat of the room he wore a hood
that overshadowed his face; but the gleam of his eyes could be seen
as he watched the hobbits.
‘Who is that?’ Frodo asked, when he got a chance to whisper to
Mr. Butterbur. ‘I don’t think you introduced him?’
‘Him?’ said the landlord in an answering whisper, cocking an eye
without turning his head. ‘I don’t rightly know. He is one of the
wandering folk – Rangers we call them. He seldom talks: not but
what he can tell a rare tale when he has the mind. He disappears for
a month, or a year, and then he pops up again. He was in and out
pretty often last spring; but I haven’t seen him about lately. What
his right name is I’ve never heard: but he’s known round here as
Strider. Goes about at a great pace on his long shanks; though he
don’t tell nobody what cause he has to hurry. But there’s no account-
ing for East and West, as we say in Bree, meaning the Rangers and
the Shire-folk, begging your pardon. Funny you should ask about
him.’ But at that moment Mr. Butterbur was called away by a demand
for more ale and his last remark remained unexplained.
Frodo found that Strider was now looking at him, as if he had
heard or guessed all that had been said. Presently, with a wave of his
hand and a nod, he invited Frodo to come over and sit by him. As
Frodo drew near he threw back his hood, showing a shaggy head of
dark hair ﬂecked with grey, and in a pale stern face a pair of keen
grey eyes.
‘I am called Strider,’ he said in a low voice. ‘I am very pleased

to meet you, Master – Underhill, if old Butterbur got your name
right.’
‘He did,’ said Frodo stifﬂy. He felt far from comfortable under
the stare of those keen eyes.
‘Well, Master Underhill,’ said Strider, ‘if I were you, I should
stop your young friends from talking too much. Drink, ﬁre, and
chance-meeting are pleasant enough, but, well – this isn’t the Shire.
There are queer folk about. Though I say it as shouldn’t, you may
think,’ he added with a wry smile, seeing Frodo’s glance. ‘And there
have been even stranger travellers through Bree lately,’ he went on,
watching Frodo’s face.
Frodo returned his gaze but said nothing; and Strider made no
further sign. His attention seemed suddenly to be ﬁxed on Pippin.
To his alarm Frodo became aware that the ridiculous young Took,
encouraged by his success with the fat Mayor of Michel Delving, was
now actually giving a comic account of Bilbo’s farewell party. He
was already giving an imitation of the Speech, and was drawing near
to the astonishing Disappearance.
Frodo was annoyed. It was a harmless enough tale for most of the
local hobbits, no doubt: just a funny story about those funny people
away beyond the River; but some (old Butterbur, for instance) knew
a thing or two, and had probably heard rumours long ago about
Bilbo’s vanishing. It would bring the name of Baggins to their minds,
especially if there had been inquiries in Bree after that name.
Frodo ﬁdgeted, wondering what to do. Pippin was evidently much
enjoying the attention he was getting, and had become quite forgetful
of their danger. Frodo had a sudden fear that in his present mood
he might even mention the Ring; and that might well be disastrous.
‘You had better do something quick!’ whispered Strider in his ear.
Frodo jumped up and stood on a table, and began to talk. The
attention of Pippin’s audience was disturbed. Some of the hobbits
looked at Frodo and laughed and clapped, thinking that Mr.
Underhill had taken as much ale as was good for him.
Frodo suddenly felt very foolish, and found himself (as was his
habit when making a speech) ﬁngering the things in his pocket. He
felt the Ring on its chain, and quite unaccountably the desire came
over him to slip it on and vanish out of the silly situation. It seemed
to him, somehow, as if the suggestion came to him from outside,
from someone or something in the room. He resisted the temptation
ﬁrmly, and clasped the Ring in his hand, as if to keep a hold on it
and prevent it from escaping or doing any mischief. At any rate it
gave him no inspiration. He spoke ‘a few suitable words’, as they
would have said in the Shire: We are all very much gratiﬁed by the
kindness of your reception, and I venture to hope that my brief visit will

help to renew the old ties of friendship between the Shire and Bree; and
then he hesitated and coughed.
Everyone in the room was now looking at him. ‘A song!’ shouted
one of the hobbits. ‘A song! A song!’ shouted all the others. ‘Come
on now, master, sing us something that we haven’t heard before!’
For a moment Frodo stood gaping. Then in desperation he began
a ridiculous song that Bilbo had been rather fond of (and indeed
rather proud of, for he had made up the words himself ). It was about
an inn; and that is probably why it came into Frodo’s mind just
then. Here it is in full. Only a few words of it are now, as a rule,
remembered.
There is an inn, a merry old inn
beneath an old grey hill,
And there they brew a beer so brown
That the Man in the Moon himself came down
one night to drink his ﬁll.
The ostler has a tipsy cat
that plays a ﬁve-stringed ﬁddle;
And up and down he runs his bow,
Now squeaking high, now purring low,
now sawing in the middle.
The landlord keeps a little dog
that is mighty fond of jokes;
When there’s good cheer among the guests,
He cocks an ear at all the jests
and laughs until he chokes.
They also keep a horne´d cow
as proud as any queen;
But music turns her head like ale,
And makes her wave her tufted tail
and dance upon the green.
And O! the rows of silver dishes
and the store of silver spoons!
For Sunday* there’s a special pair,
And these they polish up with care
on Saturday afternoons.
* See note 2, III, p.1111

The Man in the Moon was drinking deep,
and the cat began to wail;
A dish and a spoon on the table danced,
The cow in the garden madly pranced,
and the little dog chased his tail.
The Man in the Moon took another mug,
and then rolled beneath his chair;
And there he dozed and dreamed of ale,
Till in the sky the stars were pale,
and dawn was in the air.
Then the ostler said to his tipsy cat:
‘The white horses of the Moon,
They neigh and champ their silver bits;
But their master’s been and drowned his wits,
and the Sun’ll be rising soon!’
So the cat on his ﬁddle played hey-diddle-diddle,
a jig that would wake the dead:
He squeaked and sawed and quickened the tune,
While the landlord shook the Man in the Moon:
‘It’s after three!’ he said.
They rolled the Man slowly up the hill
and bundled him into the Moon,
While his horses galloped up in rear,
And the cow came capering like a deer,
and a dish ran up with the spoon.
Now quicker the ﬁddle went deedle-dum-diddle;
the dog began to roar,
The cow and the horses stood on their heads;
The guests all bounded from their beds
and danced upon the ﬂoor.
With a ping and a pong the ﬁddle-strings broke!
the cow jumped over the Moon,
And the little dog laughed to see such fun,
And the Saturday dish went off at a run
with the silver Sunday spoon.

The round Moon rolled behind the hill
as the Sun raised up her head.
She* hardly believed her ﬁery eyes;
For though it was day, to her surprise
they all went back to bed!
There was loud and long applause. Frodo had a good voice, and
the song tickled their fancy. ‘Where’s old Barley?’ they cried. ‘He
ought to hear this. Bob ought to learn his cat the ﬁddle, and then
we’d have a dance.’ They called for more ale, and began to shout:
‘Let’s have it again, master! Come on now! Once more!’
They made Frodo have another drink, and then begin his song
again, while many of them joined in; for the tune was well known,
and they were quick at picking up words. It was now Frodo’s turn
to feel pleased with himself. He capered about on the table; and
when he came a second time to the cow jumped over the Moon, he
leaped in the air. Much too vigorously; for he came down, bang, into
a tray full of mugs, and slipped, and rolled off the table with a crash,
clatter, and bump! The audience all opened their mouths wide for
laughter, and stopped short in gaping silence; for the singer dis-
appeared. He simply vanished, as if he had gone slap through the
ﬂoor without leaving a hole!
The local hobbits stared in amazement, and then sprang to their
feet and shouted for Barliman. All the company drew away from
Pippin and Sam, who found themselves left alone in a corner, and
eyed darkly and doubtfully from a distance. It was plain that many
people regarded them now as the companions of a travelling magician
of unknown powers and purpose. But there was one swarthy Bree-
lander, who stood looking at them with a knowing and half-mocking
expression that made them feel very uncomfortable. Presently he
slipped out of the door, followed by the squint-eyed southerner: the
two had been whispering together a good deal during the evening.
Frodo felt a fool. Not knowing what else to do, he crawled away
under the tables to the dark corner by Strider, who sat unmoved,
giving no sign of his thoughts. Frodo leaned back against the wall
and took off the Ring. How it came to be on his ﬁnger he could not
tell. He could only suppose that he had been handling it in his pocket
while he sang, and that somehow it had slipped on when he stuck
out his hand with a jerk to save his fall. For a moment he wondered
if the Ring itself had not played him a trick; perhaps it had tried to
reveal itself in response to some wish or command that was felt in
the room. He did not like the looks of the men that had gone out.
* Elves (and Hobbits) always refer to the Sun as She.

‘Well?’ said Strider, when he reappeared. ‘Why did you do that?
Worse than anything your friends could have said! You have put your
foot in it! Or should I say your ﬁnger?’
‘I don’t know what you mean,’ said Frodo, annoyed and alarmed.
‘Oh yes, you do,’ answered Strider; ‘but we had better wait until
the uproar has died down. Then, if you please, Mr. Baggins, I should
like a quiet word with you.’
‘What about?’ asked Frodo, ignoring the sudden use of his proper
name.
‘A matter of some importance – to us both,’ answered Strider,
looking Frodo in the eye. ‘You may hear something to your
advantage.’
‘Very well,’ said Frodo, trying to appear unconcerned. ‘I’ll talk to
you later.’
Meanwhile an argument was going on by the ﬁreplace. Mr.
Butterbur had come trotting in, and he was now trying to listen to
several conﬂicting accounts of the event at the same time.
‘I saw him, Mr. Butterbur,’ said a hobbit; ‘or leastways I didn’t
see him, if you take my meaning. He just vanished into thin air, in
a manner of speaking.’
‘You don’t say, Mr. Mugwort!’ said the landlord, looking puzzled.
‘Yes I do!’ replied Mugwort. ‘And I mean what I say, what’s more.’
‘There’s some mistake somewhere,’ said Butterbur, shaking his
head. ‘There was too much of that Mr. Underhill to go vanishing
into thin air; or into thick air, as is more likely in this room.’
‘Well, where is he now?’ cried several voices.
‘How should I know? He’s welcome to go where he will, so long
as he pays in the morning. There’s Mr. Took, now: he’s not vanished.’
‘Well, I saw what I saw, and I saw what I didn’t,’ said Mugwort
obstinately.
‘And I say there’s some mistake,’ repeated Butterbur, picking up
the tray and gathering up the broken crockery.
‘Of course there’s a mistake!’ said Frodo. ‘I haven’t vanished. Here
I am! I’ve just been having a few words with Strider in the corner.’
He came forward into the ﬁrelight; but most of the company
backed away, even more perturbed than before. They were not in
the least satisﬁed by his explanation that he had crawled away quickly
under the tables after he had fallen. Most of the Hobbits and the
Men of Bree went off then and there in a huff, having no fancy for
further entertainment that evening. One or two gave Frodo a black
look and departed muttering among themselves. The Dwarves and
the two or three strange Men that still remained got up and said
good night to the landlord, but not to Frodo and his friends. Before

long no one was left but Strider, who sat on, unnoticed, by the wall.
Mr. Butterbur did not seem much put out. He reckoned, very
probably, that his house would be full again on many future nights,
until the present mystery had been thoroughly discussed. ‘Now what
have you been doing, Mr. Underhill?’ he asked. ‘Frightening my
customers and breaking up my crocks with your acrobatics!’
‘I am very sorry to have caused any trouble,’ said Frodo. ‘It was
quite unintentional, I assure you. A most unfortunate accident.’
‘All right, Mr. Underhill! But if you’re going to do any more
tumbling, or conjuring, or whatever it was, you’d best warn folk
beforehand – and warn me. We’re a bit suspicious round here of
anything out of the way – uncanny, if you understand me; and we
don’t take to it all of a sudden.’
‘I shan’t be doing anything of the sort again, Mr. Butterbur, I
promise you. And now I think I’ll be getting to bed. We shall be
making an early start. Will you see that our ponies are ready by eight
o’clock?’
‘Very good! But before you go, I should like a word with you in
private, Mr. Underhill. Something has just come back to my mind
that I ought to tell you. I hope that you’ll not take it amiss. When
I’ve seen to a thing or two, I’ll come along to your room, if you’re
willing.’
‘Certainly!’ said Frodo; but his heart sank. He wondered how
many private talks he would have before he got to bed, and what
they would reveal. Were these people all in league against him? He
began to suspect even old Butterbur’s fat face of concealing dark
designs.

Chapter 10
S T R I D E R
Frodo, Pippin, and Sam made their way back to the parlour. There
was no light. Merry was not there, and the ﬁre had burned low. It
was not until they had puffed up the embers into a blaze and thrown
on a couple of faggots that they discovered Strider had come with
them. There he was calmly sitting in a chair by the door!
‘Hallo!’ said Pippin. ‘Who are you, and what do you want?’
‘I am called Strider,’ he answered; ‘and though he may have for-
gotten it, your friend promised to have a quiet talk with me.’
‘You said I might hear something to my advantage, I believe,’ said
Frodo. ‘What have you to say?’
‘Several things,’ answered Strider. ‘But, of course, I have my price.’
‘What do you mean?’ asked Frodo sharply.
‘Don’t be alarmed! I mean just this: I will tell you what I know,
and give you some good advice – but I shall want a reward.’
‘And what will that be, pray?’ said Frodo. He suspected now that
he had fallen in with a rascal, and he thought uncomfortably that he
had brought only a little money with him. All of it would hardly
satisfy a rogue, and he could not spare any of it.
‘No more than you can afford,’ answered Strider with a slow smile,
as if he guessed Frodo’s thoughts. ‘Just this: you must take me along
with you, until I wish to leave you.’
‘Oh, indeed!’ replied Frodo, surprised, but not much relieved.
‘Even if I wanted another companion, I should not agree to any such
thing, until I knew a good deal more about you, and your business.’
‘Excellent!’ exclaimed Strider, crossing his legs and sitting back
comfortably. ‘You seem to be coming to your senses again, and that
is all to the good. You have been much too careless so far. Very well!
I will tell you what I know, and leave the reward to you. You may
be glad to grant it, when you have heard me.’
‘Go on then!’ said Frodo. ‘What do you know?’
‘Too much; too many dark things,’ said Strider grimly. ‘But as
for your business——’ He got up and went to the door, opened it
quickly and looked out. Then he shut it quietly and sat down again.
‘I have quick ears,’ he went on, lowering his voice, ‘and though I
cannot disappear, I have hunted many wild and wary things and I
can usually avoid being seen, if I wish. Now, I was behind the hedge
this evening on the Road west of Bree, when four hobbits came out
of the Downlands. I need not repeat all that they said to old Bombadil

or to one another; but one thing interested me. Please remember, said
one of them, that the name Baggins must not be mentioned. I am Mr.
Underhill, if any name must be given. That interested me so much that
I followed them here. I slipped over the gate just behind them. Maybe
Mr. Baggins has an honest reason for leaving his name behind; but
if so, I should advise him and his friends to be more careful.’
‘I don’t see what interest my name has for anyone in Bree,’ said
Frodo angrily, ‘and I have still to learn why it interests you. Mr.
Strider may have an honest reason for spying and eavesdropping; but
if so, I should advise him to explain it.’
‘Well answered!’ said Strider laughing. ‘But the explanation is
simple: I was looking for a Hobbit called Frodo Baggins. I wanted
to ﬁnd him quickly. I had learned that he was carrying out of the
Shire, well, a secret that concerned me and my friends.
‘Now, don’t mistake me!’ he cried, as Frodo rose from his seat,
and Sam jumped up with a scowl. ‘I shall take more care of the secret
than you do. And care is needed!’ He leaned forward and looked
at them. ‘Watch every shadow!’ he said in a low voice. ‘Black horse-
men have passed through Bree. On Monday one came down the
Greenway, they say; and another appeared later, coming up the
Greenway from the south.’
There was a silence. At last Frodo spoke to Pippin and Sam: ‘I
ought to have guessed it from the way the gatekeeper greeted us,’ he
said. ‘And the landlord seems to have heard something. Why did he
press us to join the company? And why on earth did we behave so
foolishly: we ought to have stayed quiet in here.’
‘It would have been better,’ said Strider. ‘I would have stopped
your going into the common-room, if I could; but the innkeeper
would not let me in to see you, or take a message.’
‘Do you think he——’ began Frodo.
‘No, I don’t think any harm of old Butterbur. Only he does not
altogether like mysterious vagabonds of my sort.’ Frodo gave him a
puzzled look. ‘Well, I have rather a rascally look, have I not?’ said
Strider with a curl of his lip and a queer gleam in his eye. ‘But I
hope we shall get to know one another better. When we do, I hope
you will explain what happened at the end of your song. For that
little prank——’
‘It was sheer accident!’ interrupted Frodo.
‘I wonder,’ said Strider. ‘Accident, then. That accident has made
your position dangerous.’
‘Hardly more than it was already,’ said Frodo. ‘I knew these horse-
men were pursuing me; but now at any rate they seem to have missed
me and to have gone away.’

‘You must not count on that!’ said Strider sharply. ‘They will
return. And more are coming. There are others. I know their number.
I know these Riders.’ He paused, and his eyes were cold and hard.
‘And there are some folk in Bree who are not to be trusted,’ he went
on. ‘Bill Ferny, for instance. He has an evil name in the Bree-land,
and queer folk call at his house. You must have noticed him among
the company: a swarthy sneering fellow. He was very close with one
of the Southern strangers, and they slipped out together just after
your ‘‘accident’’. Not all of those Southerners mean well; and as
for Ferny, he would sell anything to anybody; or make mischief for
amusement.’
‘What will Ferny sell, and what has my accident got to do with
him?’ said Frodo, still determined not to understand Strider’s
hints.
‘News of you, of course,’ answered Strider. ‘An account of your
performance would be very interesting to certain people. After that
they would hardly need to be told your real name. It seems to me
only too likely that they will hear of it before this night is over. Is
that enough? You can do as you like about my reward: take me as a
guide or not. But I may say that I know all the lands between the
Shire and the Misty Mountains, for I have wandered over them for
many years. I am older than I look. I might prove useful. You will
have to leave the open road after tonight; for the horsemen will watch
it night and day. You may escape from Bree, and be allowed to go
forward while the Sun is up; but you won’t go far. They will come
on you in the wild, in some dark place where there is no help. Do
you wish them to ﬁnd you? They are terrible!’
The hobbits looked at him, and saw with surprise that his face
was drawn as if with pain, and his hands clenched the arms of his
chair. The room was very quiet and still, and the light seemed to
have grown dim. For a while he sat with unseeing eyes as if walking
in distant memory or listening to sounds in the Night far away.
‘There!’ he cried after a moment, drawing his hand across his
brow. ‘Perhaps I know more about these pursuers than you do. You
fear them, but you do not fear them enough, yet. Tomorrow you will
have to escape, if you can. Strider can take you by paths that are
seldom trodden. Will you have him?’
There was a heavy silence. Frodo made no answer; his mind was
confused with doubt and fear. Sam frowned, and looked at his master;
and at last he broke out:
‘With your leave, Mr. Frodo, I’d say no! This Strider here, he
warns and he says take care; and I say yes to that, and let’s begin
with him. He comes out of the Wild, and I never heard no good of
such folk. He knows something, that’s plain, and more than I like;

but it’s no reason why we should let him go leading us out into some
dark place far from help, as he puts it.’
Pippin ﬁdgeted and looked uncomfortable. Strider did not reply
to Sam, but turned his keen eyes on Frodo. Frodo caught his glance
and looked away. ‘No,’ he said slowly. ‘I don’t agree. I think, I think
you are not really as you choose to look. You began to talk to me
like the Bree-folk, but your voice has changed. Still Sam seems right
in this: I don’t see why you should warn us to take care, and yet ask
us to take you on trust. Why the disguise? Who are you? What do
you really know about – about my business; and how do you know
it?’
‘The lesson in caution has been well learned,’ said Strider with a
grim smile. ‘But caution is one thing and wavering is another. You
will never get to Rivendell now on your own, and to trust me is
your only chance. You must make up your mind. I will answer
some of your questions, if that will help you to do so. But why
should you believe my story, if you do not trust me already? Still
here it is——’
At that moment there came a knock at the door. Mr. Butterbur
had arrived with candles, and behind him was Nob with cans of hot
water. Strider withdrew into a dark corner.
‘I’ve come to bid you good night,’ said the landlord, putting the
candles on the table. ‘Nob! Take the water to the rooms!’ He came
in and shut the door.
‘It’s like this,’ he began, hesitating and looking troubled. ‘If I’ve
done any harm, I’m sorry indeed. But one thing drives out another,
as you’ll admit; and I’m a busy man. But ﬁrst one thing and then
another this week have jogged my memory, as the saying goes; and
not too late I hope. You see, I was asked to look out for hobbits of
the Shire, and for one by the name of Baggins in particular.’
‘And what has that got to do with me?’ asked Frodo.
‘Ah! you know best,’ said the landlord, knowingly. ‘I won’t give
you away; but I was told that this Baggins would be going by the
name of Underhill, and I was given a description that ﬁts you well
enough, if I may say so.’
‘Indeed! Let’s have it then!’ said Frodo, unwisely interrupting.
‘A stout little fellow with red cheeks,’ said Mr. Butterbur solemnly.
Pippin chuckled, but Sam looked indignant. ‘That won’t help you
much; it goes for most hobbits, Barley, he says to me,’ continued Mr.
Butterbur with a glance at Pippin. ‘But this one is taller than some and
fairer than most, and he has a cleft in his chin: perky chap with a bright
eye. Begging your pardon, but he said it, not me.’
‘He said it? And who was he?’ asked Frodo eagerly.

‘Ah! That was Gandalf, if you know who I mean. A wizard they
say he is, but he’s a good friend of mine, whether or no. But now I
don’t know what he’ll have to say to me, if I see him again: turn all
my ale sour or me into a block of wood, I shouldn’t wonder. He’s a
bit hasty. Still what’s done can’t be undone.’
‘Well, what have you done?’ said Frodo, getting impatient with
the slow unravelling of Butterbur’s thoughts.
‘Where was I?’ said the landlord, pausing and snapping his ﬁngers.
‘Ah, yes! Old Gandalf. Three months back he walked right into my
room without a knock. Barley, he says, I’m off in the morning. Will
you do something for me? You’ve only to name it, I said. I’m in a hurry,
said he, and I’ve no time myself, but I want a message took to the Shire.
Have you anyone you can send, and trust to go? I can ﬁnd someone, I
said, tomorrow, maybe, or the day after. Make it tomorrow, he says, and
then he gave me a letter.
‘It’s addressed plain enough,’ said Mr. Butterbur, producing a
letter from his pocket, and reading out the address slowly and proudly
(he valued his reputation as a lettered man):
Mr. FRODO BAGGINS, BAG END, HOBBITON in the SHIRE.
‘A letter for me from Gandalf !’ cried Frodo.
‘Ah!’ said Mr. Butterbur. ‘Then your right name is Baggins?’
‘It is,’ said Frodo, ‘and you had better give me that letter at once,
and explain why you never sent it. That’s what you came to tell
me, I suppose, though you’ve taken a long time to come to the
point.’
Poor Mr. Butterbur looked troubled. ‘You’re right, master,’ he
said, ‘and I beg your pardon. And I’m mortal afraid of what Gandalf
will say, if harm comes of it. But I didn’t keep it back a-purpose. I
put it by safe. Then I couldn’t ﬁnd nobody willing to go to the Shire
next day, nor the day after, and none of my own folk were to spare;
and then one thing after another drove it out of my mind. I’m a busy
man. I’ll do what I can to set matters right, and if there’s any help
I can give, you’ve only to name it.
‘Leaving the letter aside, I promised Gandalf no less. Barley, he
says to me, this friend of mine from the Shire, he may be coming out this
way before long, him and another. He’ll be calling himself Underhill. Mind
that! But you need ask no questions. And if I’m not with him, he may be
in trouble, and he may need help. Do whatever you can for him, and I’ll
be grateful, he says. And here you are, and trouble is not far off,
seemingly.’
‘What do you mean?’ asked Frodo.
‘These black men,’ said the landlord lowering his voice. ‘They’re

looking for Baggins, and if they mean well, then I’m a hobbit. It was on
Monday, and all the dogs were yammering and the geese screaming.
Uncanny, I called it. Nob, he came and told me that two black men
were at the door asking for a hobbit called Baggins. Nob’s hair was
all stood on end. I bid the black fellows be off, and slammed the
door on them; but they’ve been asking the same question all the way
to Archet, I hear. And that Ranger, Strider, he’s been asking ques-
tions, too. Tried to get in here to see you, before you’d had bite or
sup, he did.’
‘He did!’ said Strider suddenly, coming forward into the light.
‘And much trouble would have been saved, if you had let him in,
Barliman.’
The landlord jumped with surprise. ‘You!’ he cried. ‘You’re always
popping up. What do you want now?’
‘He’s here with my leave,’ said Frodo. ‘He came to offer me his
help.’
‘Well, you know your own business, maybe,’ said Mr. Butterbur,
looking suspiciously at Strider. ‘But if I was in your plight, I wouldn’t
take up with a Ranger.’
‘Then who would you take up with?’ asked Strider. ‘A fat innkeeper
who only remembers his own name because people shout it at him
all day? They cannot stay in The Pony for ever, and they cannot go
home. They have a long road before them. Will you go with them
and keep the black men off ?’
‘Me? Leave Bree! I wouldn’t do that for any money,’ said Mr.
Butterbur, looking really scared. ‘But why can’t you stay here quiet
for a bit, Mr. Underhill? What are all these queer goings on? What
are these black men after, and where do they come from, I’d like to
know?’
‘I’m sorry I can’t explain it all,’ answered Frodo. ‘I am tired and
very worried, and it’s a long tale. But if you mean to help me, I ought
to warn you that you will be in danger as long as I am in your house.
These Black Riders: I am not sure, but I think, I fear they come
from——’
‘They come from Mordor,’ said Strider in a low voice. ‘From
Mordor, Barliman, if that means anything to you.’
‘Save us!’ cried Mr. Butterbur turning pale; the name evidently
was known to him. ‘That is the worst news that has come to Bree in
my time.’
‘It is,’ said Frodo. ‘Are you still willing to help me?’
‘I am,’ said Mr. Butterbur. ‘More than ever. Though I don’t know
what the likes of me can do against, against——’ he faltered.
‘Against the Shadow in the East,’ said Strider quietly. ‘Not much,
Barliman, but every little helps. You can let Mr. Underhill stay here

tonight, as Mr. Underhill; and you can forget the name of Baggins,
till he is far away.’
‘I’ll do that,’ said Butterbur. ‘But they’ll ﬁnd out he’s here without
help from me, I’m afraid. It’s a pity Mr. Baggins drew attention to
himself this evening, to say no more. The story of that Mr. Bilbo’s
going off has been heard before tonight in Bree. Even our Nob has
been doing some guessing in his slow pate; and there are others in
Bree quicker in the uptake than he is.’
‘Well, we can only hope the Riders won’t come back yet,’ said
Frodo.
‘I hope not, indeed,’ said Butterbur. ‘But spooks or no spooks,
they won’t get in The Pony so easy. Don’t you worry till the morning.
Nob’ll say no word. No black man shall pass my doors, while I can
stand on my legs. Me and my folk’ll keep watch tonight; but you
had best get some sleep, if you can.’
‘In any case we must be called at dawn,’ said Frodo. ‘We must
get off as early as possible. Breakfast at six-thirty, please.’
‘Right! I’ll see to the orders,’ said the landlord. ‘Good night, Mr.
Baggins – Underhill, I should say! Good night – now, bless me!
Where’s your Mr. Brandybuck?’
‘I don’t know,’ said Frodo with sudden anxiety. They had forgot-
ten all about Merry, and it was getting late. ‘I am afraid he is out.
He said something about going for a breath of air.’
‘Well, you do want looking after and no mistake: your party might
be on a holiday!’ said Butterbur. ‘I must go and bar the doors quick,
but I’ll see your friend is let in when he comes. I’d better send Nob
to look for him. Good night to you all!’ At last Mr. Butterbur went
out, with another doubtful look at Strider and a shake of his head.
His footsteps retreated down the passage.
‘Well?’ said Strider. ‘When are you going to open that letter?’
Frodo looked carefully at the seal before he broke it. It seemed cer-
tainly to be Gandalf ’s. Inside, written in the wizard’s strong but
graceful script, was the following message:
THE PRANCING PONY, BREE. Midyear’s Day, Shire Year, 1418.
Dear Frodo,
Bad news has reached me here. I must go off at once. You had better
leave Bag End soon, and get out of the Shire before the end of July at
latest. I will return as soon as I can; and I will follow you, if I ﬁnd that
you are gone. Leave a message for me here, if you pass through Bree. You
can trust the landlord (Butterbur). You may meet a friend of mine on the
Road: a Man, lean, dark, tall, by some called Strider. He knows our

business and will help you. Make for Rivendell. There I hope we may meet
again. If I do not come, Elrond will advise you.
Yours in haste
GANDALF.
PS. Do NOT use It again, not for any reason whatever! Do not travel
by night!
PPS. Make sure that it is the real Strider. There are many strange men
on the roads. His true name is Aragorn.
All that is gold does not glitter,
Not all those who wander are lost;
The old that is strong does not wither,
Deep roots are not reached by the frost.
From the ashes a ﬁre shall be woken,
A light from the shadows shall spring;
Renewed shall be blade that was broken,
The crownless again shall be king.
PPPS. I hope Butterbur sends this promptly. A worthy man, but his
memory is like a lumber-room: thing wanted always
buried. If he forgets, I shall roast him.
Fare Well!
Frodo read the letter to himself, and then passed it to Pippin and
Sam. ‘Really old Butterbur has made a mess of things!’ he said. ‘He
deserves roasting. If I had got this at once, we might all have been
safe in Rivendell by now. But what can have happened to Gandalf ?
He writes as if he was going into great danger.’
‘He has been doing that for many years,’ said Strider.
Frodo turned and looked at him thoughtfully, wondering about
Gandalf ’s second postscript. ‘Why didn’t you tell me that you were
Gandalf ’s friend at once?’ he asked. ‘It would have saved time.’
‘Would it? Would any of you have believed me till now?’ said
Strider. ‘I knew nothing of this letter. For all I knew I had to persuade
you to trust me without proofs, if I was to help you. In any case, I
did not intend to tell you all about myself at once. I had to study
you ﬁrst, and make sure of you. The Enemy has set traps for me
before now. As soon as I had made up my mind, I was ready to tell
you whatever you asked. But I must admit,’ he added with a queer
laugh, ‘that I hoped you would take to me for my own sake. A hunted
man sometimes wearies of distrust and longs for friendship. But there,
I believe my looks are against me.’
‘They are – at ﬁrst sight at any rate,’ laughed Pippin with sudden

relief after reading Gandalf ’s letter. ‘But handsome is as handsome
does, as we say in the Shire; and I daresay we shall all look much
the same after lying for days in hedges and ditches.’
‘It would take more than a few days, or weeks, or years, of wander-
ing in the Wild to make you look like Strider,’ he answered. ‘And
you would die ﬁrst, unless you are made of sterner stuff than you
look to be.’
Pippin subsided; but Sam was not daunted, and he still eyed
Strider dubiously. ‘How do we know you are the Strider that Gandalf
speaks about?’ he demanded. ‘You never mentioned Gandalf, till this
letter came out. You might be a play-acting spy, for all I can see,
trying to get us to go with you. You might have done in the real
Strider and took his clothes. What have you to say to that?’
‘That you are a stout fellow,’ answered Strider; ‘but I am afraid
my only answer to you, Sam Gamgee, is this. If I had killed the real
Strider, I could kill you. And I should have killed you already without
so much talk. If I was after the Ring, I could have it – now!’
He stood up, and seemed suddenly to grow taller. In his eyes
gleamed a light, keen and commanding. Throwing back his cloak,
he laid his hand on the hilt of a sword that had hung concealed by
his side. They did not dare to move. Sam sat wide-mouthed staring
at him dumbly.
‘But I am the real Strider, fortunately,’ he said, looking down at
them with his face softened by a sudden smile. ‘I am Aragorn son of
Arathorn; and if by life or death I can save you, I will.’
There was a long silence. At last Frodo spoke with hesitation. ‘I
believed that you were a friend before the letter came,’ he said, ‘or
at least I wished to. You have frightened me several times tonight,
but never in the way that servants of the Enemy would, or so I
imagine. I think one of his spies would – well, seem fairer and feel
fouler, if you understand.’
‘I see,’ laughed Strider. ‘I look foul and feel fair. Is that it? All that
is gold does not glitter, not all those who wander are lost.’
‘Did the verses apply to you then?’ asked Frodo. ‘I could not make
out what they were about. But how did you know that they were in
Gandalf ’s letter, if you have never seen it?’
‘I did not know,’ he answered. ‘But I am Aragorn, and those verses
go with that name.’ He drew out his sword, and they saw that the
blade was indeed broken a foot below the hilt. ‘Not much use is it,
Sam?’ said Strider. ‘But the time is near when it shall be forged
anew.’
Sam said nothing.
‘Well,’ said Strider, ‘with Sam’s permission we will call that settled.

Strider shall be your guide. And now I think it is time you went to
bed and took what rest you can. We shall have a rough road to-
morrow. Even if we are allowed to leave Bree unhindered, we can
hardly hope now to leave it unnoticed. But I shall try to get lost as
soon as possible. I know one or two ways out of Bree-land other than
the main road. If once we shake off the pursuit, I shall make for
Weathertop.’
‘Weathertop?’ said Sam. ‘What’s that?’
‘It is a hill, just to the north of the Road, about half way from
here to Rivendell. It commands a wide view all round; and there we
shall have a chance to look about us. Gandalf will make for that
point, if he follows us. After Weathertop our journey will become
more difﬁcult, and we shall have to choose between various dangers.’
‘When did you last see Gandalf ?’ asked Frodo. ‘Do you know
where he is, or what he is doing?’
Strider looked grave. ‘I do not know,’ he said. ‘I came west with
him in the spring. I have often kept watch on the borders of the Shire
in the last few years, when he was busy elsewhere. He seldom left it
unguarded. We last met on the ﬁrst of May: at Sarn Ford down the
Brandywine. He told me that his business with you had gone well,
and that you would be starting for Rivendell in the last week of
September. As I knew he was at your side, I went away on a journey
of my own. And that has proved ill; for plainly some news reached
him, and I was not at hand to help.
‘I am troubled, for the ﬁrst time since I have known him. We
should have had messages, even if he could not come himself. When
I returned, many days ago, I heard the ill news. The tidings had gone
far and wide that Gandalf was missing and the horsemen had been
seen. It was the Elven-folk of Gildor that told me this; and later
they told me that you had left your home; but there was no news
of your leaving Buckland. I have been watching the East Road
anxiously.’
‘Do you think the Black Riders have anything to do with it – with
Gandalf ’s absence, I mean?’ asked Frodo.
‘I do not know of anything else that could have hindered him,
except the Enemy himself,’ said Strider. ‘But do not give up hope!
Gandalf is greater than you Shire-folk know – as a rule you can only
see his jokes and toys. But this business of ours will be his greatest
task.’
Pippin yawned. ‘I am sorry,’ he said, ‘but I am dead tired. In spite
of all the danger and worry I must go to bed, or sleep where I sit.
Where is that silly fellow, Merry? It would be the last straw, if we
had to go out in the dark to look for him.’
*
*
*

At that moment they heard a door slam; then feet came running
along the passage. Merry came in with a rush followed by Nob. He
shut the door hastily, and leaned against it. He was out of breath.
They stared at him in alarm for a moment before he gasped: ‘I have
seen them, Frodo! I have seen them! Black Riders!’
‘Black Riders!’ cried Frodo. ‘Where?’
‘Here. In the village. I stayed indoors for an hour. Then as you
did not come back, I went out for a stroll. I had come back again
and was standing just outside the light of the lamp looking at the
stars. Suddenly I shivered and felt that something horrible was creep-
ing near: there was a sort of deeper shade among the shadows across
the road, just beyond the edge of the lamplight. It slid away at once
into the dark without a sound. There was no horse.’
‘Which way did it go?’ asked Strider, suddenly and sharply.
Merry started, noticing the stranger for the ﬁrst time. ‘Go on!’
said Frodo. ‘This is a friend of Gandalf ’s. I will explain later.’
‘It seemed to make off up the Road, eastward,’ continued Merry.
‘I tried to follow. Of course, it vanished almost at once; but I went
round the corner and on as far as the last house on the Road.’
Strider looked at Merry with wonder. ‘You have a stout heart,’ he
said; ‘but it was foolish.’
‘I don’t know,’ said Merry. ‘Neither brave nor silly, I think. I could
hardly help myself. I seemed to be drawn somehow. Anyway, I went,
and suddenly I heard voices by the hedge. One was muttering; and
the other was whispering, or hissing. I couldn’t hear a word that was
said. I did not creep any closer, because I began to tremble all over.
Then I felt terriﬁed, and I turned back, and was just going to bolt
home, when something came behind me and I...I fell over.’
‘I found him, sir,’ put in Nob. ‘Mr. Butterbur sent me out with
a lantern. I went down to West-gate, and then back up towards
South-gate. Just nigh Bill Ferny’s house I thought I could see some-
thing in the Road. I couldn’t swear to it, but it looked to me as if
two men was stooping over something, lifting it. I gave a shout, but
when I got up to the spot there was no signs of them, and only Mr.
Brandybuck lying by the roadside. He seemed to be asleep. ‘‘I thought
I had fallen into deep water,’’ he says to me, when I shook him. Very
queer he was, and as soon as I had roused him, he got up and ran
back here like a hare.’
‘I am afraid that’s true,’ said Merry, ‘though I don’t know what I
said. I had an ugly dream, which I can’t remember. I went to pieces.
I don’t know what came over me.’
‘I do,’ said Strider. ‘The Black Breath. The Riders must have left
their horses outside, and passed back through the South-gate in
secret. They will know all the news now, for they have visited Bill

Ferny; and probably that Southerner was a spy as well. Something
may happen in the night, before we leave Bree.’
‘What will happen?’ said Merry. ‘Will they attack the inn?’
‘No, I think not,’ said Strider. ‘They are not all here yet. And in
any case that is not their way. In dark and loneliness they are strong-
est; they will not openly attack a house where there are lights and
many people – not until they are desperate, not while all the long
leagues of Eriador still lie before us. But their power is in terror, and
already some in Bree are in their clutch. They will drive these wretches
to some evil work: Ferny, and some of the strangers, and, maybe,
the gatekeeper too. They had words with Harry at West-gate on
Monday. I was watching them. He was white and shaking when they
left him.’
‘We seem to have enemies all round,’ said Frodo. ‘What are we
to do?’
‘Stay here, and do not go to your rooms! They are sure to have
found out which those are. The hobbit-rooms have windows looking
north and close to the ground. We will all remain together and bar
this window and the door. But ﬁrst Nob and I will fetch your luggage.’
While Strider was gone, Frodo gave Merry a rapid account of
all that had happened since supper. Merry was still reading and
pondering Gandalf ’s letter when Strider and Nob returned.
‘Well Masters,’ said Nob, ‘I’ve rufﬂed up the clothes and put in
a bolster down the middle of each bed. And I made a nice imitation
of your head with a brown woollen mat, Mr. Bag – Underhill, sir,’
he added with a grin.
Pippin laughed. ‘Very life-like!’ he said. ‘But what will happen
when they have penetrated the disguise?’
‘We shall see,’ said Strider. ‘Let us hope to hold the fort till
morning.’
‘Good night to you,’ said Nob, and went off to take his part in
the watch on the doors.
Their bags and gear they piled on the parlour-ﬂoor. They pushed
a low chair against the door and shut the window. Peering out, Frodo
saw that the night was still clear. The Sickle* was swinging bright
above the shoulders of Bree-hill. He then closed and barred the heavy
inside shutters and drew the curtains together. Strider built up the
ﬁre and blew out all the candles.
The hobbits lay down on their blankets with their feet towards the
hearth; but Strider settled himself in the chair against the door. They
talked for a little, for Merry still had several questions to ask.
‘Jumped over the Moon!’ chuckled Merry as he rolled himself in
* The Hobbits’ name for the Plough or Great Bear.

his blanket. ‘Very ridiculous of you, Frodo! But I wish I had been
there to see. The worthies of Bree will be discussing it a hundred
years hence.’
‘I hope so,’ said Strider. Then they all fell silent, and one by one
the hobbits dropped off to sleep.

Chapter 11
A  K N I F E  I N  T H E  D A R K
As they prepared for sleep in the inn at Bree, darkness lay on Buck-
land; a mist strayed in the dells and along the river-bank. The house
at Crickhollow stood silent. Fatty Bolger opened the door cautiously
and peered out. A feeling of fear had been growing on him all day,
and he was unable to rest or go to bed: there was a brooding threat
in the breathless night-air. As he stared out into the gloom, a black
shadow moved under the trees; the gate seemed to open of its own
accord and close again without a sound. Terror seized him. He shrank
back, and for a moment he stood trembling in the hall. Then he shut
and locked the door.
The night deepened. There came the soft sound of horses led
with stealth along the lane. Outside the gate they stopped, and three
black ﬁgures entered, like shades of night creeping across the ground.
One went to the door, one to the corner of the house on either side;
and there they stood, as still as the shadows of stones, while night
went slowly on. The house and the quiet trees seemed to be waiting
breathlessly.
There was a faint stir in the leaves, and a cock crowed far away.
The cold hour before dawn was passing. The ﬁgure by the door
moved. In the dark without moon or stars a drawn blade gleamed,
as if a chill light had been unsheathed. There was a blow, soft but
heavy, and the door shuddered.
‘Open, in the name of Mordor!’ said a voice thin and menacing.
At a second blow the door yielded and fell back, with timbers
burst and lock broken. The black ﬁgures passed swiftly in.
At that moment, among the trees nearby, a horn rang out. It rent
the night like ﬁre on a hill-top.
awake! fear! fire! foes! awake!
Fatty Bolger had not been idle. As soon as he saw the dark shapes
creep from the garden, he knew that he must run for it, or perish.
And run he did, out of the back door, through the garden, and over
the ﬁelds. When he reached the nearest house, more than a mile
away, he collapsed on the doorstep. ‘No, no, no!’ he was crying. ‘No,
not me! I haven’t got it!’ It was some time before anyone could make
out what he was babbling about. At last they got the idea that enemies

were in Buckland, some strange invasion from the Old Forest. And
then they lost no more time.
fear! fire! foes!
The Brandybucks were blowing the Horn-call of Buckland, that
had not been sounded for a hundred years, not since the white wolves
came in the Fell Winter, when the Brandywine was frozen over.
awake! awake!
Far away answering horns were heard. The alarm was spreading.
The black ﬁgures ﬂed from the house. One of them let fall a
hobbit-cloak on the step, as he ran. In the lane the noise of hoofs
broke out, and gathering to a gallop, went hammering away into the
darkness. All about Crickhollow there was the sound of horns blow-
ing, and voices crying and feet running. But the Black Riders rode
like a gale to the North-gate. Let the little people blow! Sauron would
deal with them later. Meanwhile they had another errand: they knew
now that the house was empty and the Ring had gone. They rode
down the guards at the gate and vanished from the Shire.
In the early night Frodo woke from deep sleep, suddenly, as if
some sound or presence had disturbed him. He saw that Strider was
sitting alert in his chair: his eyes gleamed in the light of the ﬁre,
which had been tended and was burning brightly; but he made no
sign or movement.
Frodo soon went to sleep again; but his dreams were again troubled
with the noise of wind and of galloping hoofs. The wind seemed to
be curling round the house and shaking it; and far off he heard a
horn blowing wildly. He opened his eyes, and heard a cock crowing
lustily in the inn-yard. Strider had drawn the curtains and pushed
back the shutters with a clang. The ﬁrst grey light of day was in the
room, and a cold air was coming through the open window.
As soon as Strider had roused them all, he led the way to their
bedrooms. When they saw them they were glad that they had taken
his advice: the windows had been forced open and were swinging,
and the curtains were ﬂapping; the beds were tossed about, and the
bolsters slashed and ﬂung upon the ﬂoor; the brown mat was torn
to pieces.
Strider immediately went to fetch the landlord. Poor Mr.
Butterbur looked sleepy and frightened. He had hardly closed his
eyes all night (so he said), but he had never heard a sound.

‘Never has such a thing happened in my time!’ he cried, raising
his hands in horror. ‘Guests unable to sleep in their beds, and good
bolsters ruined and all! What are we coming to?’
‘Dark times,’ said Strider. ‘But for the present you may be left in
peace, when you have got rid of us. We will leave at once. Never
mind about breakfast: a drink and a bite standing will have to do.
We shall be packed in a few minutes.’
Mr. Butterbur hurried off to see that their ponies were got ready,
and to fetch them a ‘bite’. But very soon he came back in dismay.
The ponies had vanished! The stable-doors had all been opened in
the night, and they were gone: not only Merry’s ponies, but every
other horse and beast in the place.
Frodo was crushed by the news. How could they hope to reach
Rivendell on foot, pursued by mounted enemies? They might as well
set out for the Moon. Strider sat silent for a while, looking at the
hobbits, as if he was weighing up their strength and courage.
‘Ponies would not help us to escape horsemen,’ he said at last,
thoughtfully, as if he guessed what Frodo had in mind. ‘We should
not go much slower on foot, not on the roads that I mean to take. I
was going to walk in any case. It is the food and stores that trouble
me. We cannot count on getting anything to eat between here and
Rivendell, except what we take with us; and we ought to take plenty
to spare; for we may be delayed, or forced to go round-about, far
out of the direct way. How much are you prepared to carry on your
backs?’
‘As much as we must,’ said Pippin with a sinking heart, but trying
to show that he was tougher than he looked (or felt).
‘I can carry enough for two,’ said Sam deﬁantly.
‘Can’t anything be done, Mr. Butterbur?’ asked Frodo. ‘Can’t we
get a couple of ponies in the village, or even one just for the baggage?
I don’t suppose we could hire them, but we might be able to buy
them,’ he added, doubtfully, wondering if he could afford it.
‘I doubt it,’ said the landlord unhappily. ‘The two or three riding-
ponies that there were in Bree were stabled in my yard, and they’re
gone. As for other animals, horses or ponies for draught or what not,
there are very few of them in Bree, and they won’t be for sale. But
I’ll do what I can. I’ll rout out Bob and send him round as soon as
may be.’
‘Yes,’ said Strider reluctantly, ‘you had better do that. I am afraid
we shall have to try to get one pony at least. But so ends all hope of
starting early, and slipping away quietly! We might as well have blown
a horn to announce our departure. That was part of their plan, no
doubt.’
‘There is one crumb of comfort,’ said Merry, ‘and more than a

crumb, I hope: we can have breakfast while we wait – and sit down
to it. Let’s get hold of Nob!’
In the end there was more than three hours’ delay. Bob came back
with the report that no horse or pony was to be got for love or money
in the neighbourhood – except one: Bill Ferny had one that he might
possibly sell. ‘A poor old half-starved creature it is,’ said Bob; ‘but
he won’t part with it for less than thrice its worth, seeing how you’re
placed, not if I knows Bill Ferny.’
‘Bill Ferny?’ said Frodo. ‘Isn’t there some trick? Wouldn’t the
beast bolt back to him with all our stuff, or help in tracking us, or
something?’
‘I wonder,’ said Strider. ‘But I cannot imagine any animal running
home to him, once it got away. I fancy this is only an afterthought
of kind Master Ferny’s: just a way of increasing his proﬁts from the
affair. The chief danger is that the poor beast is probably at death’s
door. But there does not seem any choice. What does he want for
it?’
Bill Ferny’s price was twelve silver pennies; and that was indeed
at least three times the pony’s value in those parts. It proved to be
a bony, underfed, and dispirited animal; but it did not look like dying
just yet. Mr. Butterbur paid for it himself, and offered Merry another
eighteen pence as some compensation for the lost animals. He was
an honest man, and well-off as things were reckoned in Bree; but
thirty silver pennies was a sore blow to him, and being cheated by
Bill Ferny made it harder to bear.
As a matter of fact he came out on the right side in the end. It
turned out later that only one horse had been actually stolen. The
others had been driven off, or had bolted in terror, and were found
wandering in different corners of the Bree-land. Merry’s ponies had
escaped altogether, and eventually (having a good deal of sense) they
made their way to the Downs in search of Fatty Lumpkin. So they
came under the care of Tom Bombadil for a while, and were well-off.
But when news of the events at Bree came to Tom’s ears, he sent
them to Mr. Butterbur, who thus got ﬁve good beasts at a very fair
price. They had to work harder in Bree, but Bob treated them well;
so on the whole they were lucky: they missed a dark and dangerous
journey. But they never came to Rivendell.
However, in the meanwhile for all Mr. Butterbur knew his money
was gone for good, or for bad. And he had other troubles. For there
was a great commotion as soon as the remaining guests were astir
and heard news of the raid on the inn. The southern travellers had
lost several horses and blamed the innkeeper loudly, until it became
known that one of their own number had also disappeared in the

night, none other than Bill Ferny’s squint-eyed companion. Suspicion
fell on him at once.
‘If you pick up with a horse-thief, and bring him to my house,’
said Butterbur angrily, ‘you ought to pay for all the damage yourselves
and not come shouting at me. Go and ask Ferny where your hand-
some friend is!’ But it appeared that he was nobody’s friend, and
nobody could recollect when he had joined their party.
After their breakfast the hobbits had to re-pack, and get together
further supplies for the longer journey they were now expecting. It
was close on ten o’clock before they at last got off. By that time the
whole of Bree was buzzing with excitement. Frodo’s vanishing trick;
the appearance of the black horsemen; the robbing of the stables; and
not least the news that Strider the Ranger had joined the mysterious
hobbits, made such a tale as would last for many uneventful years.
Most of the inhabitants of Bree and Staddle, and many even from
Combe and Archet, were crowded in the road to see the travellers
start. The other guests in the inn were at the doors or hanging out
of the windows.
Strider had changed his mind, and had decided to leave Bree by
the main road. Any attempt to set off across country at once would
only make matters worse: half the inhabitants would follow them, to
see what they were up to, and to prevent them from trespassing.
They said farewell to Nob and Bob, and took leave of Mr.
Butterbur with many thanks. ‘I hope we shall meet again some day,
when things are merry once more,’ said Frodo. ‘I should like nothing
better than to stay in your house in peace for a while.’
They tramped off, anxious and downhearted, under the eyes of
the crowd. Not all the faces were friendly, nor all the words that
were shouted. But Strider seemed to be held in awe by most of the
Bree-landers, and those that he stared at shut their mouths and drew
away. He walked in front with Frodo; next came Merry and Pippin;
and last came Sam leading the pony, which was laden with as much
of their baggage as they had the heart to give it; but already it looked
less dejected, as if it approved of the change in its fortunes. Sam was
chewing an apple thoughtfully. He had a pocket full of them: a parting
present from Nob and Bob. ‘Apples for walking, and a pipe for
sitting,’ he said. ‘But I reckon I’ll miss them both before long.’
The hobbits took no notice of the inquisitive heads that peeped
out of doors, or popped over walls and fences, as they passed. But
as they drew near to the further gate, Frodo saw a dark ill-kept house
behind a thick hedge: the last house in the village. In one of the
windows he caught a glimpse of a sallow face with sly, slanting eyes;
but it vanished at once.

‘So that’s where that southerner is hiding!’ he thought. ‘He looks
more than half like a goblin.’
Over the hedge another man was staring boldly. He had heavy
black brows, and dark scornful eyes; his large mouth curled in a
sneer. He was smoking a short black pipe. As they approached he
took it out of his mouth and spat.
‘Morning, Longshanks!’ he said. ‘Off early? Found some friends
at last?’ Strider nodded, but did not answer.
‘Morning, my little friends!’ he said to the others. ‘I suppose you
know who you’ve taken up with? That’s Stick-at-naught Strider, that
is! Though I’ve heard other names not so pretty. Watch out tonight!
And you, Sammie, don’t go ill-treating my poor old pony! Pah!’ He
spat again.
Sam turned quickly. ‘And you, Ferny,’ he said, ‘put your ugly face
out of sight, or it will get hurt.’ With a sudden ﬂick, quick as lightning,
an apple left his hand and hit Bill square on the nose. He ducked
too late, and curses came from behind the hedge. ‘Waste of a good
apple,’ said Sam regretfully, and strode on.
At last they left the village behind. The escort of children and
stragglers that had followed them got tired and turned back at the
South-gate. Passing through, they kept on along the Road for some
miles. It bent to the left, curving back into its eastward line as it
rounded the feet of Bree-hill, and then it began to run swiftly down-
wards into wooded country. To their left they could see some of the
houses and hobbit-holes of Staddle on the gentler south-eastern
slopes of the hill; down in a deep hollow away north of the Road
there were wisps of rising smoke that showed where Combe lay;
Archet was hidden in the trees beyond.
After the Road had run down some way, and had left Bree-hill
standing tall and brown behind, they came on a narrow track that
led off towards the North. ‘This is where we leave the open and take
to cover,’ said Strider.
‘Not a ‘‘short cut’’, I hope,’ said Pippin. ‘Our last short cut through
woods nearly ended in disaster.’
‘Ah, but you had not got me with you then,’ laughed Strider. ‘My
cuts, short or long, don’t go wrong.’ He took a look up and down
the Road. No one was in sight; and he led the way quickly down
towards the wooded valley.
His plan, as far as they could understand it without knowing the
country, was to go towards Archet at ﬁrst, but to bear right and pass
it on the east, and then to steer as straight as he could over the wild
lands to Weathertop Hill. In that way they would, if all went well,
cut off a great loop of the Road, which further on bent southwards

to avoid the Midgewater Marshes. But, of course, they would have
to pass through the marshes themselves, and Strider’s description of
them was not encouraging.
However, in the meanwhile, walking was not unpleasant. Indeed,
if it had not been for the disturbing events of the night before, they
would have enjoyed this part of the journey better than any up to
that time. The sun was shining, clear but not too hot. The woods in
the valley were still leafy and full of colour, and seemed peaceful
and wholesome. Strider guided them conﬁdently among the many
crossing paths, although left to themselves they would soon have
been at a loss. He was taking a wandering course with many turns
and doublings, to put off any pursuit.
‘Bill Ferny will have watched where we left the Road, for certain,’
he said; ‘though I don’t think he will follow us himself. He knows
the land round here well enough, but he knows he is not a match
for me in a wood. It is what he may tell others that I am afraid of. I
don’t suppose they are far away. If they think we have made for
Archet, so much the better.’
Whether because of Strider’s skill or for some other reason, they saw
no sign and heard no sound of any other living thing all that day:
neither two-footed, except birds; nor four-footed, except one fox and
a few squirrels. The next day they began to steer a steady course
eastwards; and still all was quiet and peaceful. On the third day out
from Bree they came out of the Chetwood. The land had been falling
steadily, ever since they turned aside from the Road, and they now
entered a wide ﬂat expanse of country, much more difﬁcult to man-
age. They were far beyond the borders of the Bree-land, out in the
pathless wilderness, and drawing near to the Midgewater Marshes.
The ground now became damp, and in places boggy and here and
there they came upon pools, and wide stretches of reeds and rushes
ﬁlled with the warbling of little hidden birds. They had to pick their
way carefully to keep both dry-footed and on their proper course. At
ﬁrst they made fair progress, but as they went on, their passage
became slower and more dangerous. The marshes were bewildering
and treacherous, and there was no permanent trail even for Rangers
to ﬁnd through their shifting quagmires. The ﬂies began to torment
them, and the air was full of clouds of tiny midges that crept up their
sleeves and breeches and into their hair.
‘I am being eaten alive!’ cried Pippin. ‘Midgewater! There are
more midges than water!’
‘What do they live on when they can’t get hobbit?’ asked Sam,
scratching his neck.
They spent a miserable day in this lonely and unpleasant country.

Their camping-place was damp, cold, and uncomfortable; and the
biting insects would not let them sleep. There were also abominable
creatures haunting the reeds and tussocks that from the sound of
them were evil relatives of the cricket. There were thousands of them,
and they squeaked all round, neek-breek, breek-neek, unceasingly all
the night, until the hobbits were nearly frantic.
The next day, the fourth, was little better, and the night almost
as comfortless. Though the Neekerbreekers (as Sam called them)
had been left behind, the midges still pursued them.
As Frodo lay, tired but unable to close his eyes, it seemed to him
that far away there came a light in the eastern sky: it ﬂashed and
faded many times. It was not the dawn, for that was still some hours
off.
‘What is the light?’ he said to Strider, who had risen, and was
standing, gazing ahead into the night.
‘I do not know,’ Strider answered. ‘It is too distant to make out.
It is like lightning that leaps up from the hill-tops.’
Frodo lay down again, but for a long while he could still see the
white ﬂashes, and against them the tall dark ﬁgure of Strider, standing
silent and watchful. At last he passed into uneasy sleep.
They had not gone far on the ﬁfth day when they left the last
straggling pools and reed-beds of the marshes behind them. The land
before them began steadily to rise again. Away in the distance east-
ward they could now see a line of hills. The highest of them was at
the right of the line and a little separated from the others. It had a
conical top, slightly ﬂattened at the summit.
‘That is Weathertop,’ said Strider. ‘The Old Road, which we have
left far away on our right, runs to the south of it and passes not far
from its foot. We might reach it by noon tomorrow, if we go straight
towards it. I suppose we had better do so.’
‘What do you mean?’ asked Frodo.
‘I mean: when we do get there, it is not certain what we shall ﬁnd.
It is close to the Road.’
‘But surely we were hoping to ﬁnd Gandalf there?’
‘Yes; but the hope is faint. If he comes this way at all, he may not
pass through Bree, and so he may not know what we are doing. And
anyway, unless by luck we arrive almost together, we shall miss one
another; it will not be safe for him or for us to wait there long. If the
Riders fail to ﬁnd us in the wilderness, they are likely to make for
Weathertop themselves. It commands a wide view all round. Indeed,
there are many birds and beasts in this country that could see us, as
we stand here, from that hill-top. Not all the birds are to be trusted,
and there are other spies more evil than they are.’

The hobbits looked anxiously at the distant hills. Sam looked up
into the pale sky, fearing to see hawks or eagles hovering over them
with bright unfriendly eyes. ‘You do make me feel uncomfortable
and lonesome, Strider!’ he said.
‘What do you advise us to do?’ asked Frodo.
‘I think,’ answered Strider slowly, as if he was not quite sure, ‘I
think the best thing is to go as straight eastward from here as we can,
to make for the line of hills, not for Weathertop. There we can strike
a path I know that runs at their feet; it will bring us to Weathertop
from the north and less openly. Then we shall see what we shall see.’
All that day they plodded along, until the cold and early evening
came down. The land became drier and more barren; but mists and
vapours lay behind them on the marshes. A few melancholy birds
were piping and wailing, until the round red sun sank slowly into the
western shadows; then an empty silence fell. The hobbits thought of
the soft light of sunset glancing through the cheerful windows of Bag
End far away.
At the day’s end they came to a stream that wandered down from
the hills to lose itself in the stagnant marshland, and they went up
along its banks while the light lasted. It was already night when at
last they halted and made their camp under some stunted alder-trees
by the shores of the stream. Ahead there loomed now against the dusky
sky the bleak and treeless backs of the hills. That night they set a watch,
and Strider, it seemed, did not sleep at all. The moon was waxing, and
in the early night-hours a cold grey light lay on the land.
Next morning they set out again soon after sunrise. There was a
frost in the air, and the sky was a pale clear blue. The hobbits felt
refreshed, as if they had had a night of unbroken sleep. Already they
were getting used to much walking on short commons – shorter at
any rate than what in the Shire they would have thought barely
enough to keep them on their legs. Pippin declared that Frodo was
looking twice the hobbit that he had been.
‘Very odd,’ said Frodo, tightening his belt, ‘considering that there
is actually a good deal less of me. I hope the thinning process will
not go on indeﬁnitely, or I shall become a wraith.’
‘Do not speak of such things!’ said Strider quickly, and with sur-
prising earnestness.
The hills drew nearer. They made an undulating ridge, often rising
almost to a thousand feet, and here and there falling again to low
clefts or passes leading into the eastern land beyond. Along the crest
of the ridge the hobbits could see what looked to be the remains of
green-grown walls and dikes, and in the clefts there still stood the

ruins of old works of stone. By night they had reached the feet of
the westward slopes, and there they camped. It was the night of the
ﬁfth of October, and they were six days out from Bree.
In the morning they found, for the ﬁrst time since they had left
the Chetwood, a track plain to see. They turned right and followed
it southwards. It ran cunningly, taking a line that seemed chosen so
as to keep as much hidden as possible from the view, both of the
hill-tops above and of the ﬂats to the west. It dived into dells, and
hugged steep banks; and where it passed over ﬂatter and more open
ground on either side of it there were lines of large boulders and
hewn stones that screened the travellers almost like a hedge.
‘I wonder who made this path, and what for,’ said Merry, as they
walked along one of these avenues, where the stones were unusually
large and closely set. ‘I am not sure that I like it: it has a – well,
rather a barrow-wightish look. Is there any barrow on Weathertop?’
‘No. There is no barrow on Weathertop, nor on any of these hills,’
answered Strider. ‘The Men of the West did not live here; though
in their latter days they defended the hills for a while against the evil
that came out of Angmar. This path was made to serve the forts along
the walls. But long before, in the ﬁrst days of the North Kingdom, they
built a great watch-tower on Weathertop, Amon Suˆl they called it. It
was burned and broken, and nothing remains of it now but a tumbled
ring, like a rough crown on the old hill’s head. Yet once it was tall and
fair. It is told that Elendil stood there watching for the coming of Gil-
galad out of the West, in the days of the Last Alliance.’
The hobbits gazed at Strider. It seemed that he was learned in old
lore, as well as in the ways of the wild. ‘Who was Gil-galad?’ asked
Merry; but Strider did not answer, and seemed to be lost in thought.
Suddenly a low voice murmured:
Gil-galad was an Elven-king.
Of him the harpers sadly sing:
the last whose realm was fair and free
between the Mountains and the Sea.
His sword was long, his lance was keen,
his shining helm afar was seen;
the countless stars of heaven’s ﬁeld
were mirrored in his silver shield.
But long ago he rode away,
and where he dwelleth none can say;
for into darkness fell his star
in Mordor where the shadows are.

The others turned in amazement, for the voice was Sam’s.
‘Don’t stop!’ said Merry.
‘That’s all I know,’ stammered Sam, blushing. ‘I learned it from
Mr. Bilbo when I was a lad. He used to tell me tales like that, knowing
how I was always one for hearing about Elves. It was Mr. Bilbo as
taught me my letters. He was mighty book-learned was dear old
Mr. Bilbo. And he wrote poetry. He wrote what I have just said.’
‘He did not make it up,’ said Strider. ‘It is part of the lay that is
called The Fall of Gil-galad, which is in an ancient tongue. Bilbo must
have translated it. I never knew that.’
‘There was a lot more,’ said Sam, ‘all about Mordor. I didn’t learn
that part, it gave me the shivers. I never thought I should be going
that way myself !’
‘Going to Mordor!’ cried Pippin. ‘I hope it won’t come to that!’
‘Do not speak that name so loudly!’ said Strider.
It was already mid-day when they drew near the southern end of
the path, and saw before them, in the pale clear light of the October
sun, a grey-green bank, leading up like a bridge on to the northward
slope of the hill. They decided to make for the top at once, while the
daylight was broad. Concealment was no longer possible, and they
could only hope that no enemy or spy was observing them. Nothing
was to be seen moving on the hill. If Gandalf was anywhere about,
there was no sign of him.
On the western ﬂank of Weathertop they found a sheltered hollow,
at the bottom of which there was a bowl-shaped dell with grassy
sides. There they left Sam and Pippin with the pony and their packs
and luggage. The other three went on. After half an hour’s plodding
climb Strider reached the crown of the hill; Frodo and Merry fol-
lowed, tired and breathless. The last slope had been steep and rocky.
On the top they found, as Strider had said, a wide ring of ancient
stone-work, now crumbling or covered with age-long grass. But in
the centre a cairn of broken stones had been piled. They were black-
ened as if with ﬁre. About them the turf was burned to the roots and
all within the ring the grass was scorched and shrivelled, as if ﬂames
had swept the hill-top; but there was no sign of any living thing.
Standing upon the rim of the ruined circle, they saw all round
below them a wide prospect, for the most part of lands empty and
featureless, except for patches of woodland away to the south, beyond
which they caught here and there the glint of distant water. Beneath
them on this southern side there ran like a ribbon the Old Road,
coming out of the West and winding up and down, until it faded
behind a ridge of dark land to the east. Nothing was moving on it.
Following its line eastward with their eyes they saw the Mountains:

the nearer foothills were brown and sombre; behind them stood taller
shapes of grey, and behind those again were high white peaks glim-
mering among the clouds.
‘Well, here we are!’ said Merry. ‘And very cheerless and uninviting
it looks! There is no water and no shelter. And no sign of Gandalf.
But I don’t blame him for not waiting – if he ever came here.’
‘I wonder,’ said Strider, looking round thoughtfully. ‘Even if he
was a day or two behind us at Bree, he could have arrived here ﬁrst.
He can ride very swiftly when need presses.’ Suddenly he stooped
and looked at the stone on the top of the cairn; it was ﬂatter than
the others, and whiter, as if it had escaped the ﬁre. He picked it up
and examined it, turning it in his ﬁngers. ‘This has been handled
recently,’ he said. ‘What do you think of these marks?’
On the ﬂat under-side Frodo saw some scratches:
. ‘There
seems to be a stroke, a dot, and three more strokes,’ he said.
‘The stroke on the left might be a G-rune with thin branches,’
said Strider. ‘It might be a sign left by Gandalf, though one cannot
be sure. The scratches are ﬁne, and they certainly look fresh. But the
marks might mean something quite different, and have nothing to
do with us. Rangers use runes, and they come here sometimes.’
‘What could they mean, even if Gandalf made them?’ asked Merry.
‘I should say,’ answered Strider, ‘that they stood for G3, and were
a sign that Gandalf was here on October the third: that is three days
ago now. It would also show that he was in a hurry and danger was
at hand, so that he had no time or did not dare to write anything
longer or plainer. If that is so, we must be wary.’
‘I wish we could feel sure that he made the marks, whatever they
may mean,’ said Frodo. ‘It would be a great comfort to know that
he was on the way, in front of us or behind us.’
‘Perhaps,’ said Strider. ‘For myself, I believe that he was here,
and was in danger. There have been scorching ﬂames here; and now
the light that we saw three nights ago in the eastern sky comes back
to my mind. I guess that he was attacked on this hill-top, but with
what result I cannot tell. He is here no longer, and we must now
look after ourselves and make our own way to Rivendell, as best we
can.’
‘How far is Rivendell?’ asked Merry, gazing round wearily. The
world looked wild and wide from Weathertop.
‘I don’t know if the Road has ever been measured in miles beyond
the Forsaken Inn, a day’s journey east of Bree,’ answered Strider.
‘Some say it is so far, and some say otherwise. It is a strange road,
and folk are glad to reach their journey’s end, whether the time is
long or short. But I know how long it would take me on my own
feet, with fair weather and no ill fortune: twelve days from here to

the Ford of Bruinen, where the Road crosses the Loudwater that
runs out of Rivendell. We have at least a fortnight’s journey before
us, for I do not think we shall be able to use the Road.’
‘A fortnight!’ said Frodo. ‘A lot may happen in that time.’
‘It may,’ said Strider.
They stood for a while silent on the hill-top, near its southward
edge. In that lonely place Frodo for the ﬁrst time fully realized his
homelessness and danger. He wished bitterly that his fortune had left
him in the quiet and beloved Shire. He stared down at the hateful
Road, leading back westward – to his home. Suddenly he was aware
that two black specks were moving slowly along it, going westward;
and looking again he saw that three others were creeping eastward
to meet them. He gave a cry and clutched Strider’s arm.
‘Look,’ he said, pointing downwards.
At once Strider ﬂung himself on the ground behind the ruined
circle, pulling Frodo down beside him. Merry threw himself along-
side.
‘What is it?’ he whispered.
‘I do not know, but I fear the worst,’ answered Strider.
Slowly they crawled up to the edge of the ring again, and peered
through a cleft between two jagged stones. The light was no longer
bright, for the clear morning had faded, and clouds creeping out of
the East had now overtaken the sun, as it began to go down. They
could all see the black specks, but neither Frodo nor Merry could
make out their shapes for certain; yet something told them that there,
far below, were Black Riders assembling on the Road beyond the
foot of the hill.
‘Yes,’ said Strider, whose keener sight left him in no doubt. ‘The
enemy is here!’
Hastily they crept away and slipped down the north side of the
hill to ﬁnd their companions.
Sam and Peregrin had not been idle. They had explored the small
dell and the surrounding slopes. Not far away they found a spring
of clear water in the hillside, and near it footprints not more than a
day or two old. In the dell itself they found recent traces of a ﬁre,
and other signs of a hasty camp. There were some fallen rocks on
the edge of the dell nearest to the hill. Behind them Sam came upon
a small store of ﬁrewood neatly stacked.
‘I wonder if old Gandalf has been here,’ he said to Pippin. ‘Who-
ever it was put this stuff here meant to come back it seems.’
Strider was greatly interested in these discoveries. ‘I wish I had
waited and explored the ground down here myself,’ he said, hurrying
off to the spring to examine the footprints.

‘It is just as I feared,’ he said, when he came back. ‘Sam and
Pippin have trampled the soft ground, and the marks are spoilt or
confused. Rangers have been here lately. It is they who left the ﬁre-
wood behind. But there are also several newer tracks that were not
made by Rangers. At least one set was made, only a day or two ago,
by heavy boots. At least one. I cannot now be certain, but I think there
were many booted feet.’ He paused and stood in anxious thought.
Each of the hobbits saw in his mind a vision of the cloaked and
booted Riders. If the horsemen had already found the dell, the sooner
Strider led them somewhere else the better. Sam viewed the hollow
with great dislike, now that he had heard news of their enemies on
the Road, only a few miles away.
‘Hadn’t we better clear out quick, Mr. Strider?’ he asked im-
patiently. ‘It is getting late, and I don’t like this hole: it makes my
heart sink somehow.’
‘Yes, we certainly must decide what to do at once,’ answered
Strider, looking up and considering the time and the weather. ‘Well,
Sam,’ he said at last, ‘I do not like this place either; but I cannot
think of anywhere better that we could reach before nightfall. At least
we are out of sight for the moment, and if we moved we should be
much more likely to be seen by spies. All we could do would be to
go right out of our way back north on this side of the line of hills,
where the land is all much the same as it is here. The Road is watched,
but we should have to cross it, if we tried to take cover in the thickets
away to the south. On the north side of the Road beyond the hills
the country is bare and ﬂat for miles.’
‘Can the Riders see?’ asked Merry. ‘I mean, they seem usually to
have used their noses rather than their eyes, smelling for us, if smelling
is the right word, at least in the daylight. But you made us lie down
ﬂat when you saw them down below; and now you talk of being seen,
if we move.’
‘I was too careless on the hill-top,’ answered Strider. ‘I was very
anxious to ﬁnd some sign of Gandalf; but it was a mistake for three
of us to go up and stand there so long. For the black horses can see,
and the Riders can use men and other creatures as spies, as we found
at Bree. They themselves do not see the world of light as we do, but
our shapes cast shadows in their minds, which only the noon sun
destroys; and in the dark they perceive many signs and forms that
are hidden from us: then they are most to be feared. And at all times
they smell the blood of living things, desiring and hating it. Senses,
too, there are other than sight or smell. We can feel their presence
– it troubled our hearts, as soon as we came here, and before we saw
them; they feel ours more keenly. Also,’ he added, and his voice sank
to a whisper, ‘the Ring draws them.’

‘Is there no escape then?’ said Frodo, looking round wildly. ‘If I
move I shall be seen and hunted! If I stay, I shall draw them to
me!’
Strider laid his hand on his shoulder. ‘There is still hope,’ he said.
‘You are not alone. Let us take this wood that is set ready for the
ﬁre as a sign. There is little shelter or defence here, but ﬁre shall
serve for both. Sauron can put ﬁre to his evil uses, as he can all
things, but these Riders do not love it, and fear those who wield it.
Fire is our friend in the wilderness.’
‘Maybe,’ muttered Sam. ‘It is also as good a way of saying ‘‘here
we are’’ as I can think of, bar shouting.’
Down in the lowest and most sheltered corner of the dell they lit
a ﬁre, and prepared a meal. The shades of evening began to fall, and
it grew cold. They were suddenly aware of great hunger, for they had
not eaten anything since breakfast; but they dared not make more
than a frugal supper. The lands ahead were empty of all save birds
and beasts, unfriendly places deserted by all the races of the world.
Rangers passed at times beyond the hills, but they were few and did
not stay. Other wanderers were rare, and of evil sort: trolls might
stray down at times out of the northern valleys of the Misty Moun-
tains. Only on the Road would travellers be found, most often
dwarves, hurrying along on business of their own, and with no help
and few words to spare for strangers.
‘I don’t see how our food can be made to last,’ said Frodo. ‘We
have been careful enough in the last few days, and this supper is no
feast; but we have used more than we ought, if we have two weeks
still to go, and perhaps more.’
‘There is food in the wild,’ said Strider; ‘berry, root, and herb;
and I have some skill as a hunter at need. You need not be afraid of
starving before winter comes. But gathering and catching food is long
and weary work, and we need haste. So tighten your belts, and think
with hope of the tables of Elrond’s house!’
The cold increased as darkness came on. Peering out from the
edge of the dell they could see nothing but a grey land now vanishing
quickly into shadow. The sky above had cleared again and was slowly
ﬁlled with twinkling stars. Frodo and his companions huddled round
the ﬁre, wrapped in every garment and blanket they possessed; but
Strider was content with a single cloak, and sat a little apart, drawing
thoughtfully at his pipe.
As night fell and the light of the ﬁre began to shine out brightly
he began to tell them tales to keep their minds from fear. He knew
many histories and legends of long ago, of Elves and Men and the

good and evil deeds of the Elder Days. They wondered how old he
was, and where he had learned all this lore.
‘Tell us of Gil-galad,’ said Merry suddenly, when he paused at
the end of a story of the Elf-kingdoms. ‘Do you know any more of
that old lay that you spoke of ?’
‘I do indeed,’ answered Strider. ‘So also does Frodo, for it con-
cerns us closely.’ Merry and Pippin looked at Frodo, who was staring
into the ﬁre.
‘I know only the little that Gandalf has told me,’ said Frodo slowly.
‘Gil-galad was the last of the great Elf-kings of Middle-earth.
Gil-galad is Starlight in their tongue. With Elendil, the Elf-friend, he
went to the land of——’
‘No!’ said Strider interrupting, ‘I do not think that tale should be
told now with the servants of the Enemy at hand. If we win through
to the house of Elrond, you may hear it there, told in full.’
‘Then tell us some other tale of the old days,’ begged Sam; ‘a tale
about the Elves before the fading time. I would dearly like to hear
more about Elves; the dark seems to press round so close.’
‘I will tell you the tale of Tinu´viel,’ said Strider, ‘in brief – for it
is a long tale of which the end is not known; and there are none now,
except Elrond, that remember it aright as it was told of old. It is a
fair tale, though it is sad, as are all the tales of Middle-earth, and yet
it may lift up your hearts.’ He was silent for some time, and then he
began not to speak but to chant softly:
The leaves were long, the grass was green,
The hemlock-umbels tall and fair,
And in the glade a light was seen
Of stars in shadow shimmering.
Tinu´viel was dancing there
To music of a pipe unseen,
And light of stars was in her hair,
And in her raiment glimmering.
There Beren came from mountains cold,
And lost he wandered under leaves,
And where the Elven-river rolled
He walked alone and sorrowing.
He peered between the hemlock-leaves
And saw in wonder ﬂowers of gold
Upon her mantle and her sleeves,
And her hair like shadow following.

Enchantment healed his weary feet
That over hills were doomed to roam;
And forth he hastened, strong and ﬂeet,
And grasped at moonbeams glistening.
Through woven woods in Elvenhome
She lightly ﬂed on dancing feet,
And left him lonely still to roam
In the silent forest listening.
He heard there oft the ﬂying sound
Of feet as light as linden-leaves,
Or music welling underground,
In hidden hollows quavering.
Now withered lay the hemlock-sheaves,
And one by one with sighing sound
Whispering fell the beechen leaves
In the wintry woodland wavering.
He sought her ever, wandering far
Where leaves of years were thickly strewn,
By light of moon and ray of star
In frosty heavens shivering.
Her mantle glinted in the moon,
As on a hill-top high and far
She danced, and at her feet was strewn
A mist of silver quivering.
When winter passed, she came again,
And her song released the sudden spring,
Like rising lark, and falling rain,
And melting water bubbling.
He saw the elven-ﬂowers spring
About her feet, and healed again
He longed by her to dance and sing
Upon the grass untroubling.
Again she ﬂed, but swift he came.
Tinu´viel! Tinu´viel!
He called her by her Elvish name;
And there she halted listening.
One moment stood she, and a spell
His voice laid on her: Beren came,
And doom fell on Tinu´viel
That in his arms lay glistening.

As Beren looked into her eyes
Within the shadows of her hair,
The trembling starlight of the skies
He saw there mirrored shimmering.
Tinu´viel the elven-fair,
Immortal maiden elven-wise,
About him cast her shadowy hair
And arms like silver glimmering.
Long was the way that fate them bore,
O’er stony mountains cold and grey,
Through halls of iron and darkling door,
And woods of nightshade morrowless.
The Sundering Seas between them lay,
And yet at last they met once more,
And long ago they passed away
In the forest singing sorrowless.
Strider sighed and paused before he spoke again. ‘That is a song,’
he said, ‘in the mode that is called ann-thennath among the Elves,
but is hard to render in our Common Speech, and this is but a rough
echo of it. It tells of the meeting of Beren son of Barahir and Lu´thien
Tinu´viel. Beren was a mortal man, but Lu´thien was the daughter of
Thingol, a King of Elves upon Middle-earth when the world was
young; and she was the fairest maiden that has ever been among all
the children of this world. As the stars above the mists of the Northern
lands was her loveliness, and in her face was a shining light. In those
days the Great Enemy, of whom Sauron of Mordor was but a servant,
dwelt in Angband in the North, and the Elves of the West coming
back to Middle-earth made war upon him to regain the Silmarils
which he had stolen; and the fathers of Men aided the Elves. But
the Enemy was victorious and Barahir was slain, and Beren escaping
through great peril came over the Mountains of Terror into the
hidden Kingdom of Thingol in the forest of Neldoreth. There he
beheld Lu´thien singing and dancing in a glade beside the enchanted
river Esgalduin; and he named her Tinu´viel, that is Nightingale in
the language of old. Many sorrows befell them afterwards, and they
were parted long. Tinu´viel rescued Beren from the dungeons of
Sauron, and together they passed through great dangers, and cast
down even the Great Enemy from his throne, and took from his iron
crown one of the three Silmarils, brightest of all jewels, to be the
bride-price of Lu´thien to Thingol her father. Yet at the last Beren
was slain by the Wolf that came from the gates of Angband, and he
died in the arms of Tinu´viel. But she chose mortality, and to die

from the world, so that she might follow him; and it is sung that they
met again beyond the Sundering Seas, and after a brief time walking
alive once more in the green woods, together they passed, long ago,
beyond the conﬁnes of this world. So it is that Lu´thien Tinu´viel alone
of the Elf-kindred has died indeed and left the world, and they have
lost her whom they most loved. But from her the lineage of the
Elf-lords of old descended among Men. There live still those of whom
Lu´thien was the foremother, and it is said that her line shall never
fail. Elrond of Rivendell is of that Kin. For of Beren and Lu´thien
was born Dior Thingol’s heir; and of him Elwing the White whom
Ea¨rendil wedded, he that sailed his ship out of the mists of the world
into the seas of heaven with the Silmaril upon his brow. And of
Ea¨rendil came the Kings of Nu´menor, that is Westernesse.’
As Strider was speaking they watched his strange eager face, dimly
lit in the red glow of the wood-ﬁre. His eyes shone, and his voice
was rich and deep. Above him was a black starry sky. Suddenly a
pale light appeared over the crown of Weathertop behind him. The
waxing moon was climbing slowly above the hill that overshadowed
them, and the stars above the hill-top faded.
The story ended. The hobbits moved and stretched. ‘Look!’ said
Merry. ‘The Moon is rising: it must be getting late.’
The others looked up. Even as they did so, they saw on the top
of the hill something small and dark against the glimmer of the moon-
rise. It was perhaps only a large stone or jutting rock shown up by
the pale light.
Sam and Merry got up and walked away from the ﬁre. Frodo and
Pippin remained seated in silence. Strider was watching the moon-
light on the hill intently. All seemed quiet and still, but Frodo felt a
cold dread creeping over his heart, now that Strider was no longer
speaking. He huddled closer to the ﬁre. At that moment Sam came
running back from the edge of the dell.
‘I don’t know what it is,’ he said, ‘but I suddenly felt afraid. I
durstn’t go outside this dell for any money; I felt that something was
creeping up the slope.’
‘Did you see anything?’ asked Frodo, springing to his feet.
‘No, sir. I saw nothing, but I didn’t stop to look.’
‘I saw something,’ said Merry; ‘or I thought I did – away westwards
where the moonlight was falling on the ﬂats beyond the shadow of
the hill-tops, I thought there were two or three black shapes. They
seemed to be moving this way.’
‘Keep close to the ﬁre, with your faces outward!’ cried Strider.
‘Get some of the longer sticks ready in your hands!’
For a breathless time they sat there, silent and alert, with their
backs turned to the wood-ﬁre, each gazing into the shadows that

encircled them. Nothing happened. There was no sound or move-
ment in the night. Frodo stirred, feeling that he must break the
silence: he longed to shout out aloud.
‘Hush!’ whispered Strider. ‘What’s that?’ gasped Pippin at the
same moment.
Over the lip of the little dell, on the side away from the hill, they
felt, rather than saw, a shadow rise, one shadow or more than one.
They strained their eyes, and the shadows seemed to grow. Soon
there could be no doubt: three or four tall black ﬁgures were standing
there on the slope, looking down on them. So black were they that
they seemed like black holes in the deep shade behind them. Frodo
thought that he heard a faint hiss as of venomous breath and felt a
thin piercing chill. Then the shapes slowly advanced.
Terror overcame Pippin and Merry, and they threw themselves
ﬂat on the ground. Sam shrank to Frodo’s side. Frodo was hardly
less terriﬁed than his companions; he was quaking as if he was bitter
cold, but his terror was swallowed up in a sudden temptation to put
on the Ring. The desire to do this laid hold of him, and he could
think of nothing else. He did not forget the Barrow, nor the message
of Gandalf; but something seemed to be compelling him to disregard
all warnings, and he longed to yield. Not with the hope of escape,
or of doing anything, either good or bad: he simply felt that he must
take the Ring and put it on his ﬁnger. He could not speak. He felt
Sam looking at him, as if he knew that his master was in some great
trouble, but he could not turn towards him. He shut his eyes and
struggled for a while; but resistance became unbearable, and at last
he slowly drew out the chain, and slipped the Ring on the foreﬁnger
of his left hand.
Immediately, though everything else remained as before, dim and
dark, the shapes became terribly clear. He was able to see beneath
their black wrappings. There were ﬁve tall ﬁgures: two standing on
the lip of the dell, three advancing. In their white faces burned keen
and merciless eyes; under their mantles were long grey robes; upon
their grey hairs were helms of silver; in their haggard hands were
swords of steel. Their eyes fell on him and pierced him, as they rushed
towards him. Desperate, he drew his own sword, and it seemed to
him that it ﬂickered red, as if it was a ﬁrebrand. Two of the ﬁgures
halted. The third was taller than the others: his hair was long and
gleaming and on his helm was a crown. In one hand he held a long
sword, and in the other a knife; both the knife and the hand that
held it glowed with a pale light. He sprang forward and bore down
on Frodo.
At that moment Frodo threw himself forward on the ground, and
he heard himself crying aloud: O Elbereth! Gilthoniel! At the same

time he struck at the feet of his enemy. A shrill cry rang out in the
night; and he felt a pain like a dart of poisoned ice pierce his left
shoulder. Even as he swooned he caught, as through a swirling mist,
a glimpse of Strider leaping out of the darkness with a ﬂaming
brand of wood in either hand. With a last effort Frodo, dropping his
sword, slipped the Ring from his ﬁnger and closed his right hand tight
upon it.

Chapter 12
F L I G H T  T O  T H E  F O R D
When Frodo came to himself he was still clutching the Ring desper-
ately. He was lying by the ﬁre, which was now piled high and burning
brightly. His three companions were bending over him.
‘What has happened? Where is the pale king?’ he asked wildly.
They were too overjoyed to hear him speak to answer for a while;
nor did they understand his question. At length he gathered from
Sam that they had seen nothing but the vague shadowy shapes coming
towards them. Suddenly to his horror Sam found that his master had
vanished; and at that moment a black shadow rushed past him, and
he fell. He heard Frodo’s voice, but it seemed to come from a great
distance, or from under the earth, crying out strange words. They
saw nothing more, until they stumbled over the body of Frodo, lying
as if dead, face downwards on the grass with his sword beneath him.
Strider ordered them to pick him up and lay him near the ﬁre, and
then he disappeared. That was now a good while ago.
Sam plainly was beginning to have doubts again about Strider;
but while they were talking he returned, appearing suddenly out of
the shadows. They started, and Sam drew his sword and stood over
Frodo; but Strider knelt down swiftly at his side.
‘I am not a Black Rider, Sam,’ he said gently, ‘nor in league with
them. I have been trying to discover something of their movements;
but I have found nothing. I cannot think why they have gone and do
not attack again. But there is no feeling of their presence anywhere
at hand.’
When he heard what Frodo had to tell, he became full of concern,
and shook his head and sighed. Then he ordered Pippin and Merry
to heat as much water as they could in their small kettles, and to
bathe the wound with it. ‘Keep the ﬁre going well, and keep Frodo
warm!’ he said. Then he got up and walked away, and called Sam
to him. ‘I think I understand things better now,’ he said in a low
voice. ‘There seem only to have been ﬁve of the enemy. Why they
were not all here, I don’t know; but I don’t think they expected to
be resisted. They have drawn off for the time being. But not far, I
fear. They will come again another night, if we cannot escape. They
are only waiting, because they think that their purpose is almost
accomplished, and that the Ring cannot ﬂy much further. I fear,
Sam, that they believe your master has a deadly wound that will
subdue him to their will. We shall see!’

Sam choked with tears. ‘Don’t despair!’ said Strider. ‘You must
trust me now. Your Frodo is made of sterner stuff than I had guessed,
though Gandalf hinted that it might prove so. He is not slain, and I
think he will resist the evil power of the wound longer than his
enemies expect. I will do all I can to help and heal him. Guard him
well, while I am away!’ He hurried off and disappeared again into
the darkness.
Frodo dozed, though the pain of his wound was slowly growing, and
a deadly chill was spreading from his shoulder to his arm and side.
His friends watched over him, warming him, and bathing his wound.
The night passed slowly and wearily. Dawn was growing in the sky,
and the dell was ﬁlling with grey light, when Strider at last returned.
‘Look!’ he cried; and stooping he lifted from the ground a black
cloak that had lain there hidden by the darkness. A foot above the
lower hem there was a slash. ‘This was the stroke of Frodo’s sword,’
he said. ‘The only hurt that it did to his enemy, I fear; for it is
unharmed, but all blades perish that pierce that dreadful King. More
deadly to him was the name of Elbereth.’
‘And more deadly to Frodo was this!’ He stooped again and lifted
up a long thin knife. There was a cold gleam in it. As Strider raised
it they saw that near the end its edge was notched and the point was
broken off. But even as he held it up in the growing light, they gazed in
astonishment, for the blade seemed to melt, and vanished like a smoke
in the air, leaving only the hilt in Strider’s hand. ‘Alas!’ he cried. ‘It
was this accursed knife that gave the wound. Few now have the skill in
healing to match such evil weapons. But I will do what I can.’
He sat down on the ground, and taking the dagger-hilt laid it on
his knees, and he sang over it a slow song in a strange tongue. Then
setting it aside, he turned to Frodo and in a soft tone spoke words
the others could not catch. From the pouch at his belt he drew out
the long leaves of a plant.
‘These leaves,’ he said, ‘I have walked far to ﬁnd; for this plant
does not grow in the bare hills; but in the thickets away south of the
Road I found it in the dark by the scent of its leaves.’ He crushed a
leaf in his ﬁngers, and it gave out a sweet and pungent fragrance. ‘It
is fortunate that I could ﬁnd it, for it is a healing plant that the Men
of the West brought to Middle-earth. Athelas they named it, and it
grows now sparsely and only near places where they dwelt or camped
of old; and it is not known in the North, except to some of those
who wander in the Wild. It has great virtues, but over such a wound
as this its healing powers may be small.’
He threw the leaves into boiling water and bathed Frodo’s shoul-
der. The fragrance of the steam was refreshing, and those that were

unhurt felt their minds calmed and cleared. The herb had also some
power over the wound, for Frodo felt the pain and also the sense of
frozen cold lessen in his side; but the life did not return to his arm,
and he could not raise or use his hand. He bitterly regretted his
foolishness, and reproached himself for weakness of will; for he now
perceived that in putting on the Ring he obeyed not his own desire
but the commanding wish of his enemies. He wondered if he would
remain maimed for life, and how they would now manage to continue
their journey. He felt too weak to stand.
The others were discussing this very question. They quickly
decided to leave Weathertop as soon as possible. ‘I think now,’ said
Strider, ‘that the enemy has been watching this place for some days.
If Gandalf ever came here, then he must have been forced to ride
away, and he will not return. In any case we are in great peril here
after dark, since the attack of last night, and we can hardly meet
greater danger wherever we go.’
As soon as the daylight was full, they had some hurried food and
packed. It was impossible for Frodo to walk, so they divided the
greater part of their baggage among the four of them, and put Frodo
on the pony. In the last few days the poor beast had improved wonder-
fully; it already seemed fatter and stronger, and had begun to show
an affection for its new masters, especially for Sam. Bill Ferny’s
treatment must have been very hard for the journey in the wild to
seem so much better than its former life.
They started off in a southerly direction. This would mean crossing
the Road, but it was the quickest way to more wooded country. And
they needed fuel; for Strider said that Frodo must be kept warm,
especially at night, while ﬁre would be some protection for them all.
It was also his plan to shorten their journey by cutting across another
great loop of the Road: east beyond Weathertop it changed its course
and took a wide bend northwards.
They made their way slowly and cautiously round the south-
western slopes of the hill, and came in a little while to the edge of
the Road. There was no sign of the Riders. But even as they were
hurrying across they heard far away two cries: a cold voice calling
and a cold voice answering. Trembling they sprang forward, and
made for the thickets that lay ahead. The land before them sloped
away southwards, but it was wild and pathless; bushes and stunted
trees grew in dense patches with wide barren spaces in between. The
grass was scanty, coarse, and grey; and the leaves in the thickets were
faded and falling. It was a cheerless land, and their journey was slow
and gloomy. They spoke little as they trudged along. Frodo’s heart
was grieved as he watched them walking beside him with their heads

down, and their backs bowed under their burdens. Even Strider
seemed tired and heavy-hearted.
Before the ﬁrst day’s march was over Frodo’s pain began to grow
again, but he did not speak of it for a long time. Four days passed,
without the ground or the scene changing much, except that behind
them Weathertop slowly sank, and before them the distant mountains
loomed a little nearer. Yet since that far cry they had seen and heard
no sign that the enemy had marked their ﬂight or followed them.
They dreaded the dark hours, and kept watch in pairs by night,
expecting at any time to see black shapes stalking in the grey night,
dimly lit by the cloud-veiled moon; but they saw nothing, and heard
no sound but the sigh of withered leaves and grass. Not once did
they feel the sense of present evil that had assailed them before the
attack in the dell. It seemed too much to hope that the Riders had
already lost their trail again. Perhaps they were waiting to make some
ambush in a narrow place?
At the end of the ﬁfth day the ground began once more to rise
slowly out of the wide shallow valley into which they had descended.
Strider now turned their course again north-eastwards, and on the
sixth day they reached the top of a long slow-climbing slope, and
saw far ahead a huddle of wooded hills. Away below them they could
see the Road sweeping round the feet of the hills; and to their right
a grey river gleamed pale in the thin sunshine. In the distance they
glimpsed yet another river in a stony valley half-veiled in mist.
‘I am afraid we must go back to the Road here for a while,’ said
Strider. ‘We have now come to the River Hoarwell, that the Elves
call Mitheithel. It ﬂows down out of the Ettenmoors, the troll-fells
north of Rivendell, and joins the Loudwater away in the South. Some
call it the Greyﬂood after that. It is a great water before it ﬁnds the
Sea. There is no way over it below its sources in the Ettenmoors,
except by the Last Bridge on which the Road crosses.’
‘What is that other river we can see far away there?’ asked Merry.
‘That is Loudwater, the Bruinen of Rivendell,’ answered Strider.
‘The Road runs along the edge of the hills for many miles from the
Bridge to the Ford of Bruinen. But I have not yet thought how we
shall cross that water. One river at a time! We shall be fortunate
indeed if we do not ﬁnd the Last Bridge held against us.’
Next day, early in the morning, they came down again to the
borders of the Road. Sam and Strider went forward, but they found
no sign of any travellers or riders. Here under the shadow of the hills
there had been some rain. Strider judged that it had fallen two days
before, and had washed away all footprints. No horseman had passed
since then, as far as he could see.

They hurried along with all the speed they could make, and after
a mile or two they saw the Last Bridge ahead, at the bottom of a
short steep slope. They dreaded to see black ﬁgures waiting there,
but they saw none. Strider made them take cover in a thicket at the
side of the Road, while he went forward to explore.
Before long he came hurrying back. ‘I can see no sign of the
enemy,’ he said, ‘and I wonder very much what that means. But I
have found something very strange.’
He held out his hand, and showed a single pale-green jewel. ‘I
found it in the mud in the middle of the Bridge,’ he said. ‘It is a
beryl, an elf-stone. Whether it was set there, or let fall by chance, I
cannot say; but it brings hope to me. I will take it as a sign that we
may pass the Bridge; but beyond that I dare not keep to the Road,
without some clearer token.’
At once they went on again. They crossed the Bridge in safety,
hearing no sound but the water swirling against its three great arches.
A mile further on they came to a narrow ravine that led away north-
wards through the steep lands on the left of the Road. Here Strider
turned aside, and soon they were lost in a sombre country of dark
trees winding among the feet of sullen hills.
The hobbits were glad to leave the cheerless lands and the perilous
Road behind them; but this new country seemed threatening and
unfriendly. As they went forward the hills about them steadily rose.
Here and there upon heights and ridges they caught glimpses of
ancient walls of stone, and the ruins of towers: they had an ominous
look. Frodo, who was not walking, had time to gaze ahead and to
think. He recalled Bilbo’s account of his journey and the threatening
towers on the hills north of the Road, in the country near the Trolls’
wood where his ﬁrst serious adventure had happened. Frodo guessed
that they were now in the same region, and wondered if by chance
they would pass near the spot.
‘Who lives in this land?’ he asked. ‘And who built these towers?
Is this troll-country?’
‘No!’ said Strider. ‘Trolls do not build. No one lives in this land.
Men once dwelt here, ages ago; but none remain now. They became
an evil people, as legends tell, for they fell under the shadow of
Angmar. But all were destroyed in the war that brought the North
Kingdom to its end. But that is now so long ago that the hills have
forgotten them, though a shadow still lies on the land.’
‘Where did you learn such tales, if all the land is empty and forget-
ful?’ asked Peregrin. ‘The birds and beasts do not tell tales of that
sort.’
‘The heirs of Elendil do not forget all things past,’ said Strider;

‘and many more things than I can tell are remembered in Rivendell.’
‘Have you often been to Rivendell?’ said Frodo.
‘I have,’ said Strider. ‘I dwelt there once, and still I return when
I may. There my heart is; but it is not my fate to sit in peace, even
in the fair house of Elrond.’
The hills now began to shut them in. The Road behind held on
its way to the River Bruinen, but both were now hidden from view.
The travellers came into a long valley; narrow, deeply cloven, dark
and silent. Trees with old and twisted roots hung over cliffs, and
piled up behind into mounting slopes of pine-wood.
The hobbits grew very weary. They advanced slowly, for they had
to pick their way through a pathless country, encumbered by fallen
trees and tumbled rocks. As long as they could they avoided climbing
for Frodo’s sake, and because it was in fact difﬁcult to ﬁnd any way
up out of the narrow dales. They had been two days in this country
when the weather turned wet. The wind began to blow steadily out
of the West and pour the water of the distant seas on the dark heads
of the hills in ﬁne drenching rain. By nightfall they were all soaked,
and their camp was cheerless, for they could not get any ﬁre to burn.
The next day the hills rose still higher and steeper before them, and
they were forced to turn away northwards out of their course. Strider
seemed to be getting anxious: they were nearly ten days out from
Weathertop, and their stock of provisions was beginning to run low.
It went on raining.
That night they camped on a stony shelf with a rock-wall behind
them, in which there was a shallow cave, a mere scoop in the cliff.
Frodo was restless. The cold and wet had made his wound more
painful than ever, and the ache and sense of deadly chill took away
all sleep. He lay tossing and turning and listening fearfully to the
stealthy night-noises: wind in chinks of rock, water dripping, a crack,
the sudden rattling fall of a loosened stone. He felt that black shapes
were advancing to smother him; but when he sat up he saw nothing
but the back of Strider sitting hunched up, smoking his pipe, and
watching. He lay down again and passed into an uneasy dream, in
which he walked on the grass in his garden in the Shire, but it seemed
faint and dim, less clear than the tall black shadows that stood looking
over the hedge.
In the morning he woke to ﬁnd that the rain had stopped. The
clouds were still thick, but they were breaking, and pale strips of blue
appeared between them. The wind was shifting again. They did not
start early. Immediately after their cold and comfortless breakfast
Strider went off alone, telling the others to remain under the shelter

of the cliff, until he came back. He was going to climb up, if he
could, and get a look at the lie of the land.
When he returned he was not reassuring. ‘We have come too far
to the north,’ he said, ‘and we must ﬁnd some way to turn back
southwards again. If we keep on as we are going we shall get up into
the Ettendales far north of Rivendell. That is troll-country, and little
known to me. We could perhaps ﬁnd our way through and come
round to Rivendell from the north; but it would take too long, for I
do not know the way, and our food would not last. So somehow or
other we must ﬁnd the Ford of Bruinen.’
The rest of that day they spent scrambling over rocky ground.
They found a passage between two hills that led them into a valley
running south-east, the direction that they wished to take; but
towards the end of the day they found their road again barred by a
ridge of high land; its dark edge against the sky was broken into many
bare points like teeth of a blunted saw. They had a choice between
going back or climbing over it.
They decided to attempt the climb, but it proved very difﬁcult.
Before long Frodo was obliged to dismount and struggle along on
foot. Even so they often despaired of getting their pony up, or indeed
of ﬁnding a path for themselves, burdened as they were. The light
was nearly gone, and they were all exhausted, when at last they
reached the top. They had climbed on to a narrow saddle between
two higher points, and the land fell steeply away again, only a short
distance ahead. Frodo threw himself down, and lay on the ground
shivering. His left arm was lifeless, and his side and shoulder felt as
if icy claws were laid upon them. The trees and rocks about him
seemed shadowy and dim.
‘We cannot go any further,’ said Merry to Strider. ‘I am afraid
this has been too much for Frodo. I am dreadfully anxious about
him. What are we to do? Do you think they will be able to cure him
in Rivendell, if we ever get there?’
‘We shall see,’ answered Strider. ‘There is nothing more that I
can do in the wilderness; and it is chieﬂy because of his wound that
I am so anxious to press on. But I agree that we can go no further
tonight.’
‘What is the matter with my master?’ asked Sam in a low voice,
looking appealingly at Strider. ‘His wound was small, and it is already
closed. There’s nothing to be seen but a cold white mark on his
shoulder.’
‘Frodo has been touched by the weapons of the Enemy,’ said
Strider, ‘and there is some poison or evil at work that is beyond my
skill to drive out. But do not give up hope, Sam!’
*
*
*

Night was cold up on the high ridge. They lit a small ﬁre down
under the gnarled roots of an old pine, that hung over a shallow pit:
it looked as if stone had once been quarried there. They sat huddled
together. The wind blew chill through the pass, and they heard the
tree-tops lower down moaning and sighing. Frodo lay half in a dream,
imagining that endless dark wings were sweeping by above him, and
that on the wings rode pursuers that sought him in all the hollows
of the hills.
The morning dawned bright and fair; the air was clean, and the
light pale and clear in a rain-washed sky. Their hearts were encour-
aged, but they longed for the sun to warm their cold stiff limbs. As
soon as it was light, Strider took Merry with him and went to survey
the country from the height to the east of the pass. The sun had risen
and was shining brightly when he returned with more comforting
news. They were now going more or less in the right direction. If
they went on, down the further side of the ridge, they would have
the Mountains on their left. Some way ahead Strider had caught a
glimpse of the Loudwater again, and he knew that, though it was
hidden from view, the Road to the Ford was not far from the River
and lay on the side nearest to them.
‘We must make for the Road again,’ he said. ‘We cannot hope to
ﬁnd a path through these hills. Whatever danger may beset it, the
Road is our only way to the Ford.’
As soon as they had eaten they set out again. They climbed slowly
down the southern side of the ridge; but the way was much easier
than they had expected, for the slope was far less steep on this side,
and before long Frodo was able to ride again. Bill Ferny’s poor old
pony was developing an unexpected talent for picking out a path,
and for sparing its rider as many jolts as possible. The spirits of the
party rose again. Even Frodo felt better in the morning light, but
every now and again a mist seemed to obscure his sight, and he
passed his hands over his eyes.
Pippin was a little ahead of the others. Suddenly he turned round
and called to them. ‘There is a path here!’ he cried.
When they came up with him, they saw that he had made no
mistake: there were clearly the beginnings of a path, that climbed
with many windings out of the woods below and faded away on the
hill-top behind. In places it was now faint and overgrown, or choked
with fallen stones and trees; but at one time it seemed to have been
much used. It was a path made by strong arms and heavy feet. Here
and there old trees had been cut or broken down, and large rocks
cloven or heaved aside to make a way.
They followed the track for some while, for it offered much the

easiest way down, but they went cautiously, and their anxiety
increased as they came into the dark woods, and the path grew plainer
and broader. Suddenly coming out of a belt of ﬁr-trees it ran steeply
down a slope, and turned sharply to the left round the corner of a
rocky shoulder of the hill. When they came to the corner they looked
round and saw that the path ran on over a level strip under the face
of a low cliff overhung with trees. In the stony wall there was a door
hanging crookedly ajar upon one great hinge.
Outside the door they all halted. There was a cave or rock-chamber
behind, but in the gloom inside nothing could be seen. Strider, Sam,
and Merry pushing with all their strength managed to open the door
a little wider, and then Strider and Merry went in. They did not go
far, for on the ﬂoor lay many old bones, and nothing else was to be
seen near the entrance except some great empty jars and broken pots.
‘Surely this is a troll-hole, if ever there was one!’ said Pippin.
‘Come out, you two, and let us get away. Now we know who made
the path – and we had better get off it quick.’
‘There is no need, I think,’ said Strider, coming out. ‘It is certainly
a troll-hole, but it seems to have been long forsaken. I don’t think
we need be afraid. But let us go on down warily, and we shall see.’
The path went on again from the door, and turning to the right
again across the level space plunged down a thick wooded slope.
Pippin, not liking to show Strider that he was still afraid, went on
ahead with Merry. Sam and Strider came behind, one on each side
of Frodo’s pony, for the path was now broad enough for four or ﬁve
hobbits to walk abreast. But they had not gone very far before
Pippin came running back, followed by Merry. They both looked
terriﬁed.
‘There are trolls!’ Pippin panted. ‘Down in a clearing in the woods
not far below. We got a sight of them through the tree-trunks. They
are very large!’
‘We will come and look at them,’ said Strider, picking up a stick.
Frodo said nothing, but Sam looked scared.
The sun was now high, and it shone down through the half-
stripped branches of the trees, and lit the clearing with bright patches
of light. They halted suddenly on the edge, and peered through the
tree-trunks, holding their breath. There stood the trolls: three large
trolls. One was stooping, and the other two stood staring at him.
Strider walked forward unconcernedly. ‘Get up, old stone!’ he
said, and broke his stick upon the stooping troll.
Nothing happened. There was a gasp of astonishment from the
hobbits, and then even Frodo laughed. ‘Well!’ he said. ‘We are forget-
ting our family history! These must be the very three that were caught

by Gandalf, quarrelling over the right way to cook thirteen dwarves
and one hobbit.’
‘I had no idea we were anywhere near the place!’ said Pippin. He
knew the story well. Bilbo and Frodo had told it often; but as a
matter of fact he had never more than half believed it. Even now he
looked at the stone trolls with suspicion, wondering if some magic
might not suddenly bring them to life again.
‘You are forgetting not only your family history, but all you ever
knew about trolls,’ said Strider. ‘It is broad daylight with a bright
sun, and yet you come back trying to scare me with a tale of live
trolls waiting for us in this glade! In any case you might have noticed
that one of them has an old bird’s nest behind his ear. That would
be a most unusual ornament for a live troll!’
They all laughed. Frodo felt his spirits reviving: the reminder of
Bilbo’s ﬁrst successful adventure was heartening. The sun, too, was
warm and comforting, and the mist before his eyes seemed to be
lifting a little. They rested for some time in the glade, and took their
mid-day meal right under the shadow of the trolls’ large legs.
‘Won’t somebody give us a bit of a song, while the sun is high?’
said Merry, when they had ﬁnished. ‘We haven’t had a song or a tale
for days.’
‘Not since Weathertop,’ said Frodo. The others looked at him.
‘Don’t worry about me!’ he added. ‘I feel much better, but I don’t
think I could sing. Perhaps Sam could dig something out of his
memory.’
‘Come on, Sam!’ said Merry. ‘There’s more stored in your head
than you let on about.’
‘I don’t know about that,’ said Sam. ‘But how would this suit? It
ain’t what I call proper poetry, if you understand me: just a bit of
nonsense. But these old images here brought it to my mind.’ Standing
up, with his hands behind his back, as if he was at school, he began
to sing to an old tune.
Troll sat alone on his seat of stone,
And munched and mumbled a bare old bone;
For many a year he had gnawed it near,
For meat was hard to come by.
Done by! Gum by!
In a cave in the hills he dwelt alone,
And meat was hard to come by.
Up came Tom with his big boots on.
Said he to Troll: ‘Pray, what is yon?
For it looks like the shin o’ my nuncle Tim,

As should be a-lyin’ in graveyard.
Caveyard! Paveyard!
This many a year has Tim been gone,
And I thought he were lyin’ in graveyard.’
‘My lad,’ said Troll, ‘this bone I stole.
But what be bones that lie in a hole?
Thy nuncle was dead as a lump o’ lead,
Afore I found his shinbone.
Tinbone! Thinbone!
He can spare a share for a poor old troll,
For he don’t need his shinbone.’
Said Tom: ‘I don’t see why the likes o’ thee
Without axin’ leave should go makin’ free
With the shank or the shin o’ my father’s kin;
So hand the old bone over!
Rover! Trover!
Though dead he be, it belongs to he;
So hand the old bone over!’
‘For a couple o’ pins,’ says Troll, and grins,
‘I’ll eat thee too, and gnaw thy shins.
A bit o’ fresh meat will go down sweet!
I’ll try my teeth on thee now.
Hee now! See now!
I’m tired o’ gnawing old bones and skins;
I’ve a mind to dine on thee now.’
But just as he thought his dinner was caught,
He found his hands had hold of naught.
Before he could mind, Tom slipped behind
And gave him the boot to larn him.
Warn him! Darn him!
A bump o’ the boot on the seat, Tom thought,
Would be the way to larn him.
But harder than stone is the ﬂesh and bone
Of a troll that sits in the hills alone.
As well set your boot to the mountain’s root,
For the seat of a troll don’t feel it.
Peel it! Heal it!
Old Troll laughed, when he heard Tom groan,
And he knew his toes could feel it.

Tom’s leg is game, since home he came,
And his bootless foot is lasting lame;
But Troll don’t care, and he’s still there
With the bone he boned from its owner.
Doner! Boner!
Troll’s old seat is still the same,
And the bone he boned from its owner!
‘Well, that’s a warning to us all!’ laughed Merry. ‘It is as well you
used a stick, and not your hand, Strider!’
‘Where did you come by that, Sam?’ asked Pippin. ‘I’ve never
heard those words before.’
Sam muttered something inaudible. ‘It’s out of his own head, of
course,’ said Frodo. ‘I am learning a lot about Sam Gamgee on this
journey. First he was a conspirator, now he’s a jester. He’ll end up
by becoming a wizard – or a warrior!’
‘I hope not,’ said Sam. ‘I don’t want to be neither!’
In the afternoon they went on down the woods. They were prob-
ably following the very track that Gandalf, Bilbo, and the dwarves
had used many years before. After a few miles they came out on the
top of a high bank above the Road. At this point the Road had left
the Hoarwell far behind in its narrow valley, and now clung close to
the feet of the hills, rolling and winding eastward among woods and
heather-covered slopes towards the Ford and the Mountains. Not
far down the bank Strider pointed out a stone in the grass. On it
roughly cut and now much weathered could still be seen dwarf-runes
and secret marks.
‘There!’ said Merry. ‘That must be the stone that marked the
place where the trolls’ gold was hidden. How much is left of Bilbo’s
share, I wonder, Frodo?’
Frodo looked at the stone, and wished that Bilbo had brought
home no treasure more perilous, nor less easy to part with. ‘None at
all,’ he said. ‘Bilbo gave it all away. He told me he did not feel it
was really his, as it came from robbers.’
The Road lay quiet under the long shadows of early evening. There
was no sign of any other travellers to be seen. As there was now no
other possible course for them to take, they climbed down the bank,
and turning left went off as fast as they could. Soon a shoulder of
the hills cut off the light of the fast westering sun. A cold wind ﬂowed
down to meet them from the mountains ahead.
They were beginning to look out for a place off the Road, where
they could camp for the night, when they heard a sound that brought

sudden fear back into their hearts: the noise of hoofs behind them.
They looked back, but they could not see far because of the many
windings and rollings of the Road. As quickly as they could they
scrambled off the beaten way and up into the deep heather and
bilberry brushwood on the slopes above, until they came to a small
patch of thick-growing hazels. As they peered out from among the
bushes, they could see the Road, faint and grey in the failing light,
some thirty feet below them. The sound of hoofs drew nearer. They
were going fast, with a light clippety-clippety-clip. Then faintly, as if it
was blown away from them by the breeze, they seemed to catch a
dim ringing, as of small bells tinkling.
‘That does not sound like a Black Rider’s horse!’ said Frodo,
listening intently. The other hobbits agreed hopefully that it did not,
but they all remained full of suspicion. They had been in fear of
pursuit for so long that any sound from behind seemed ominous and
unfriendly. But Strider was now leaning forward, stooped to the
ground, with a hand to his ear, and a look of joy on his face.
The light faded, and the leaves on the bushes rustled softly. Clearer
and nearer now the bells jingled, and clippety-clip came the quick
trotting feet. Suddenly into view below came a white horse, gleaming
in the shadows, running swiftly. In the dusk its headstall ﬂickered
and ﬂashed, as if it were studded with gems like living stars. The
rider’s cloak streamed behind him, and his hood was thrown back;
his golden hair ﬂowed shimmering in the wind of his speed. To Frodo
it appeared that a white light was shining through the form and
raiment of the rider, as if through a thin veil.
Strider sprang from hiding and dashed down towards the Road,
leaping with a cry through the heather; but even before he had moved
or called, the rider had reined in his horse and halted, looking up
towards the thicket where they stood. When he saw Strider, he dis-
mounted and ran to meet him calling out: Ai na vedui Du´nadan! Mae
govannen! His speech and clear ringing voice left no doubt in their
hearts: the rider was of the Elven-folk. No others that dwelt in the
wide world had voices so fair to hear. But there seemed to be a note
of haste or fear in his call, and they saw that he was now speaking
quickly and urgently to Strider.
Soon Strider beckoned to them, and the hobbits left the bushes
and hurried down to the Road. ‘This is Glorﬁndel, who dwells in
the house of Elrond,’ said Strider.
‘Hail, and well met at last!’ said the Elf-lord to Frodo. ‘I was sent
from Rivendell to look for you. We feared that you were in danger
upon the road.’
‘Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell?’ cried Frodo joyfully.
‘No. He had not when I departed; but that was nine days ago,’

answered Glorﬁndel. ‘Elrond received news that troubled him. Some
of my kindred, journeying in your land beyond the Baranduin,*
learned that things were amiss, and sent messages as swiftly as they
could. They said that the Nine were abroad, and that you were
astray bearing a great burden without guidance, for Gandalf had not
returned. There are few even in Rivendell that can ride openly against
the Nine; but such as there were, Elrond sent out north, west, and
south. It was thought that you might turn far aside to avoid pursuit,
and become lost in the Wilderness.
‘It was my lot to take the Road, and I came to the Bridge of
Mitheithel, and left a token there, nigh on seven days ago. Three of
the servants of Sauron were upon the Bridge, but they withdrew and
I pursued them westward. I came also upon two others, but they
turned away southward. Since then I have searched for your trail.
Two days ago I found it, and followed it over the Bridge; and today
I marked where you descended from the hills again. But come! There
is no time for further news. Since you are here we must risk the peril
of the Road and go. There are ﬁve behind us, and when they ﬁnd
your trail upon the Road they will ride after us like the wind. And
they are not all. Where the other four may be, I do not know. I fear
that we may ﬁnd the Ford is already held against us.’
While Glorﬁndel was speaking the shades of evening deepened.
Frodo felt a great weariness come over him. Ever since the sun began
to sink the mist before his eyes had darkened, and he felt that a
shadow was coming between him and the faces of his friends. Now
pain assailed him, and he felt cold. He swayed, clutching at Sam’s
arm.
‘My master is sick and wounded,’ said Sam angrily. ‘He can’t go
on riding after nightfall. He needs rest.’
Glorﬁndel caught Frodo as he sank to the ground, and taking him
gently in his arms he looked in his face with grave anxiety.
Brieﬂy Strider told of the attack on their camp under Weathertop,
and of the deadly knife. He drew out the hilt, which he had kept,
and handed it to the Elf. Glorﬁndel shuddered as he took it, but he
looked intently at it.
‘There are evil things written on this hilt,’ he said; ‘though
maybe your eyes cannot see them. Keep it, Aragorn, till we reach
the house of Elrond! But be wary, and handle it as little as you may!
Alas! the wounds of this weapon are beyond my skill to heal. I will
do what I can – but all the more do I urge you now to go on without
rest.’
He searched the wound on Frodo’s shoulder with his ﬁngers, and
* The Brandywine River.

his face grew graver, as if what he learned disquieted him. But Frodo
felt the chill lessen in his side and arm; a little warmth crept down
from his shoulder to his hand, and the pain grew easier. The dusk
of evening seemed to grow lighter about him, as if a cloud had been
withdrawn. He saw his friends’ faces more clearly again, and a
measure of new hope and strength returned.
‘You shall ride my horse,’ said Glorﬁndel. ‘I will shorten the stir-
rups up to the saddle-skirts, and you must sit as tight as you can.
But you need not fear: my horse will not let any rider fall that I
command him to bear. His pace is light and smooth; and if danger
presses too near, he will bear you away with a speed that even the
black steeds of the enemy cannot rival.’
‘No, he will not!’ said Frodo. ‘I shall not ride him, if I am to be
carried off to Rivendell or anywhere else, leaving my friends behind
in danger.’
Glorﬁndel smiled. ‘I doubt very much,’ he said, ‘if your friends
would be in danger if you were not with them! The pursuit would
follow you and leave us in peace, I think. It is you, Frodo, and that
which you bear that brings us all in peril.’
To that Frodo had no answer, and he was persuaded to mount
Glorﬁndel’s white horse. The pony was laden instead with a great
part of the others’ burdens, so that they now marched lighter, and
for a time made good speed; but the hobbits began to ﬁnd it hard
to keep up with the swift tireless feet of the Elf. On he led them, into
the mouth of darkness, and still on under the deep clouded night.
There was neither star nor moon. Not until the grey of dawn did he
allow them to halt. Pippin, Merry, and Sam were by that time nearly
asleep on their stumbling legs; and even Strider seemed by the sag
of his shoulders to be weary. Frodo sat upon the horse in a dark
dream.
They cast themselves down in the heather a few yards from the
road-side, and fell asleep immediately. They seemed hardly to have
closed their eyes when Glorﬁndel, who had set himself to watch while
they slept, awoke them again. The sun had now climbed far into the
morning, and the clouds and mists of the night were gone.
‘Drink this!’ said Glorﬁndel to them, pouring for each in turn a
little liquor from his silver-studded ﬂask of leather. It was clear as
spring water and had no taste, and it did not feel either cool or warm
in the mouth; but strength and vigour seemed to ﬂow into all their
limbs as they drank it. Eaten after that draught the stale bread and
dried fruit (which was now all that they had left) seemed to satisfy
their hunger better than many a good breakfast in the Shire had done.
*
*
*

They had rested rather less than ﬁve hours when they took to the
Road again. Glorﬁndel still urged them on, and only allowed two
brief halts during the day’s march. In this way they covered almost
twenty miles before nightfall, and came to a point where the Road
bent right and ran down towards the bottom of the valley, now
making straight for the Bruinen. So far there had been no sign or
sound of pursuit that the hobbits could see or hear; but often
Glorﬁndel would halt and listen for a moment, if they lagged behind,
and a look of anxiety clouded his face. Once or twice he spoke to
Strider in the elf-tongue.
But however anxious their guides might be, it was plain that the
hobbits could go no further that night. They were stumbling along
dizzy with weariness, and unable to think of anything but their feet
and legs. Frodo’s pain had redoubled, and during the day things
about him faded to shadows of ghostly grey. He almost welcomed
the coming of night, for then the world seemed less pale and empty.
The hobbits were still weary, when they set out again early next
morning. There were many miles yet to go between them and the
Ford, and they hobbled forward at the best pace they could manage.
‘Our peril will be greatest just ere we reach the river,’ said Glorﬁn-
del; ‘for my heart warns me that the pursuit is now swift behind us,
and other danger may be waiting by the Ford.’
The Road was still running steadily downhill, and there was now
in places much grass at either side, in which the hobbits walked when
they could, to ease their tired feet. In the late afternoon they came
to a place where the Road went suddenly under the dark shadow of
tall pine-trees, and then plunged into a deep cutting with steep moist
walls of red stone. Echoes ran along as they hurried forward; and
there seemed to be a sound of many footfalls following their own.
All at once, as if through a gate of light, the Road ran out again from
the end of the tunnel into the open. There at the bottom of a sharp
incline they saw before them a long ﬂat mile, and beyond that the
Ford of Rivendell. On the further side was a steep brown bank,
threaded by a winding path; and behind that the tall mountains
climbed, shoulder above shoulder, and peak beyond peak, into the
fading sky.
There was still an echo as of following feet in the cutting behind
them; a rushing noise as if a wind were rising and pouring through
the branches of the pines. One moment Glorﬁndel turned and
listened, then he sprang forward with a loud cry.
‘Fly!’ he called. ‘Fly! The enemy is upon us!’
The white horse leaped forward. The hobbits ran down the slope.
Glorﬁndel and Strider followed as rearguard. They were only half

way across the ﬂat, when suddenly there was a noise of horses gallop-
ing. Out of the gate in the trees that they had just left rode a Black
Rider. He reined his horse in, and halted, swaying in his saddle.
Another followed him, and then another; then again two more.
‘Ride forward! Ride!’ cried Glorﬁndel to Frodo.
He did not obey at once, for a strange reluctance seized him.
Checking the horse to a walk, he turned and looked back. The Riders
seemed to sit upon their great steeds like threatening statues upon a
hill, dark and solid, while all the woods and land about them receded
as if into a mist. Suddenly he knew in his heart that they were silently
commanding him to wait. Then at once fear and hatred awoke in
him. His hand left the bridle and gripped the hilt of his sword, and
with a red ﬂash he drew it.
‘Ride on! Ride on!’ cried Glorﬁndel, and then loud and clear he
called to the horse in the elf-tongue: noro lim, noro lim, Asfaloth!
At once the white horse sprang away and sped like the wind along
the last lap of the Road. At the same moment the black horses leaped
down the hill in pursuit, and from the Riders came a terrible cry,
such as Frodo had heard ﬁlling the woods with horror in the Eastfar-
thing far away. It was answered; and to the dismay of Frodo and his
friends out from the trees and rocks away on the left four other Riders
came ﬂying. Two rode towards Frodo; two galloped madly towards
the Ford to cut off his escape. They seemed to him to run like the
wind and to grow swiftly larger and darker, as their courses converged
with his.
Frodo looked back for a moment over his shoulder. He could no
longer see his friends. The Riders behind were falling back: even
their great steeds were no match in speed for the white elf-horse of
Glorﬁndel. He looked forward again, and hope faded. There seemed
no chance of reaching the Ford before he was cut off by the others that
had lain in ambush. He could see them clearly now: they appeared to
have cast aside their hoods and black cloaks, and they were robed in
white and grey. Swords were naked in their pale hands; helms were
on their heads. Their cold eyes glittered, and they called to him with
fell voices.
Fear now ﬁlled all Frodo’s mind. He thought no longer of his
sword. No cry came from him. He shut his eyes and clung to the
horse’s mane. The wind whistled in his ears, and the bells upon the
harness rang wild and shrill. A breath of deadly cold pierced him like
a spear, as with a last spurt, like a ﬂash of white ﬁre, the elf-horse
speeding as if on wings, passed right before the face of the foremost
Rider.
Frodo heard the splash of water. It foamed about his feet. He felt
the quick heave and surge as the horse left the river and struggled

up the stony path. He was climbing the steep bank. He was across
the Ford.
But the pursuers were close behind. At the top of the bank the
horse halted and turned about neighing ﬁercely. There were Nine
Riders at the water’s edge below, and Frodo’s spirit quailed before
the threat of their uplifted faces. He knew of nothing that would
prevent them from crossing as easily as he had done; and he felt that
it was useless to try to escape over the long uncertain path from the
Ford to the edge of Rivendell, if once the Riders crossed. In any case
he felt that he was commanded urgently to halt. Hatred again stirred
in him, but he had no longer the strength to refuse.
Suddenly the foremost Rider spurred his horse forward. It checked
at the water and reared up. With a great effort Frodo sat upright and
brandished his sword.
‘Go back!’ he cried. ‘Go back to the Land of Mordor, and follow
me no more!’ His voice sounded thin and shrill in his own ears. The
Riders halted, but Frodo had not the power of Bombadil. His enemies
laughed at him with a harsh and chilling laughter. ‘Come back! Come
back!’ they called. ‘To Mordor we will take you!’
‘Go back!’ he whispered.
‘The Ring! The Ring!’ they cried with deadly voices; and immedi-
ately their leader urged his horse forward into the water, followed
closely by two others.
‘By Elbereth and Lu´thien the Fair,’ said Frodo with a last effort,
lifting up his sword, ‘you shall have neither the Ring nor me!’
Then the leader, who was now half across the Ford, stood up
menacing in his stirrups, and raised up his hand. Frodo was stricken
dumb. He felt his tongue cleave to his mouth, and his heart labouring.
His sword broke and fell out of his shaking hand. The elf-horse reared
and snorted. The foremost of the black horses had almost set foot
upon the shore.
At that moment there came a roaring and a rushing: a noise of
loud waters rolling many stones. Dimly Frodo saw the river below
him rise, and down along its course there came a plumed cavalry of
waves. White ﬂames seemed to Frodo to ﬂicker on their crests, and
he half fancied that he saw amid the water white riders upon white
horses with frothing manes. The three Riders that were still in the midst
of the Ford were overwhelmed: they disappeared, buried suddenly
under angry foam. Those that were behind drew back in dismay.
With his last failing senses Frodo heard cries, and it seemed to
him that he saw, beyond the Riders that hesitated on the shore, a
shining ﬁgure of white light; and behind it ran small shadowy forms
waving ﬂames, that ﬂared red in the grey mist that was falling over
the world.

The black horses were ﬁlled with madness, and leaping forward
in terror they bore their riders into the rushing ﬂood. Their piercing
cries were drowned in the roaring of the river as it carried them away.
Then Frodo felt himself falling, and the roaring and confusion seemed
to rise and engulf him together with his enemies. He heard and saw
no more.

.

BOOK TWO

.

Chapter 1
M A N Y  M E E T I N G S
Frodo woke and found himself lying in bed. At ﬁrst he thought that
he had slept late, after a long unpleasant dream that still hovered on
the edge of memory. Or perhaps he had been ill? But the ceiling
looked strange; it was ﬂat, and it had dark beams richly carved. He
lay a little while longer looking at patches of sunlight on the wall,
and listening to the sound of a waterfall.
‘Where am I, and what is the time?’ he said aloud to the ceiling.
‘In the house of Elrond, and it is ten o’clock in the morning,’ said
a voice. ‘It is the morning of October the twenty-fourth, if you want
to know.’
‘Gandalf !’ cried Frodo, sitting up. There was the old wizard, sitting
in a chair by the open window.
‘Yes,’ he said, ‘I am here. And you are lucky to be here, too, after
all the absurd things you have done since you left home.’
Frodo lay down again. He felt too comfortable and peaceful to
argue, and in any case he did not think he would get the better of
an argument. He was fully awake now, and the memory of his
journey was returning: the disastrous ‘short cut’ through the Old
Forest; the ‘accident’ at The Prancing Pony; and his madness in put-
ting on the Ring in the dell under Weathertop. While he was thinking
of all these things and trying in vain to bring his memory down to
his arriving in Rivendell, there was a long silence, broken only by the
soft puffs of Gandalf ’s pipe, as he blew white smoke-rings out of the
window.
‘Where’s Sam?’ Frodo asked at length. ‘And are the others all
right?’
‘Yes, they are all safe and sound,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Sam was
here until I sent him off to get some rest, about half an hour ago.’
‘What happened at the Ford?’ said Frodo. ‘It all seemed so dim,
somehow; and it still does.’
‘Yes, it would. You were beginning to fade,’ answered Gandalf.
‘The wound was overcoming you at last. A few more hours and you
would have been beyond our aid. But you have some strength in you,
my dear hobbit! As you showed in the Barrow. That was touch and
go: perhaps the most dangerous moment of all. I wish you could
have held out at Weathertop.’
‘You seem to know a great deal already,’ said Frodo. ‘I have not
spoken to the others about the Barrow. At ﬁrst it was too horrible,

and afterwards there were other things to think about. How do you
know about it?’
‘You have talked long in your sleep, Frodo,’ said Gandalf gently,
‘and it has not been hard for me to read your mind and memory.
Do not worry! Though I said ‘‘absurd’’ just now, I did not mean it.
I think well of you – and of the others. It is no small feat to have
come so far, and through such dangers, still bearing the Ring.’
‘We should never have done it without Strider,’ said Frodo. ‘But
we needed you. I did not know what to do without you.’
‘I was delayed,’ said Gandalf, ‘and that nearly proved our ruin.
And yet I am not sure: it may have been better so.’
‘I wish you would tell me what happened!’
‘All in good time! You are not supposed to talk or worry about
anything today, by Elrond’s orders.’
‘But talking would stop me thinking and wondering, which are
quite as tiring,’ said Frodo. ‘I am wide awake now, and I remember
so many things that want explaining. Why were you delayed? You
ought to tell me that at least.’
‘You will soon hear all you wish to know,’ said Gandalf. ‘We shall
have a Council, as soon as you are well enough. At the moment I
will only say that I was held captive.’
‘You?’ cried Frodo.
‘Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey,’ said the wizard solemnly. ‘There are
many powers in the world, for good or for evil. Some are greater
than I am. Against some I have not yet been measured. But my time
is coming. The Morgul-lord and his Black Riders have come forth.
War is preparing!’
‘Then you knew of the Riders already – before I met them?’
‘Yes, I knew of them. Indeed I spoke of them once to you; for the
Black Riders are the Ringwraiths, the Nine Servants of the Lord of
the Rings. But I did not know that they had arisen again or I should
have ﬂed with you at once. I heard news of them only after I left you
in June; but that story must wait. For the moment we have been
saved from disaster, by Aragorn.’
‘Yes,’ said Frodo, ‘it was Strider that saved us. Yet I was afraid
of him at ﬁrst. Sam never quite trusted him, I think, not at any rate
until we met Glorﬁndel.’
Gandalf smiled. ‘I have heard all about Sam,’ he said. ‘He has no
more doubts now.’
‘I am glad,’ said Frodo. ‘For I have become very fond of Strider.
Well, fond is not the right word. I mean he is dear to me; though he
is strange, and grim at times. In fact, he reminds me often of you. I
didn’t know that any of the Big People were like that. I thought,
well, that they were just big, and rather stupid: kind and stupid like

Butterbur; or stupid and wicked like Bill Ferny. But then we don’t
know much about Men in the Shire, except perhaps the Bree-landers.’
‘You don’t know much even about them, if you think old Barliman
is stupid,’ said Gandalf. ‘He is wise enough on his own ground. He
thinks less than he talks, and slower; yet he can see through a brick
wall in time (as they say in Bree). But there are few left in Middle-
earth like Aragorn son of Arathorn. The race of the Kings from over
the Sea is nearly at an end. It may be that this War of the Ring will
be their last adventure.’
‘Do you really mean that Strider is one of the people of the old
Kings?’ said Frodo in wonder. ‘I thought they had all vanished long
ago. I thought he was only a Ranger.’
‘Only a Ranger!’ cried Gandalf. ‘My dear Frodo, that is just what
the Rangers are: the last remnant in the North of the great people,
the Men of the West. They have helped me before; and I shall
need their help in the days to come; for we have reached Rivendell,
but the Ring is not yet at rest.’
‘I suppose not,’ said Frodo. ‘But so far my only thought has been
to get here; and I hope I shan’t have to go any further. It is very
pleasant just to rest. I have had a month of exile and adventure, and
I ﬁnd that has been as much as I want.’
He fell silent and shut his eyes. After a while he spoke again. ‘I
have been reckoning,’ he said, ‘and I can’t bring the total up to
October the twenty-fourth. It ought to be the twenty-ﬁrst. We must
have reached the Ford by the twentieth.’
‘You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you,’ said
Gandalf. ‘How do the side and shoulder feel now?’
‘I don’t know,’ Frodo answered. ‘They don’t feel at all: which is
an improvement, but’ – he made an effort – ‘I can move my arm
again a little. Yes, it is coming back to life. It is not cold,’ he added,
touching his left hand with his right.
‘Good!’ said Gandalf. ‘It is mending fast. You will soon be sound
again. Elrond has cured you: he has tended you for days, ever since
you were brought in.’
‘Days?’ said Frodo.
‘Well, four nights and three days, to be exact. The Elves brought
you from the Ford on the night of the twentieth, and that is where
you lost count. We have been terribly anxious, and Sam has hardly
left your side, day or night, except to run messages. Elrond is a master
of healing, but the weapons of our Enemy are deadly. To tell you
the truth, I had very little hope; for I suspected that there was some
fragment of the blade still in the closed wound. But it could not be
found until last night. Then Elrond removed a splinter. It was deeply
buried, and it was working inwards.’

Frodo shuddered, remembering the cruel knife with notched
blade that had vanished in Strider’s hands. ‘Don’t be alarmed!’ said
Gandalf. ‘It is gone now. It has been melted. And it seems that
Hobbits fade very reluctantly. I have known strong warriors of the
Big People who would quickly have been overcome by that splinter,
which you bore for seventeen days.’
‘What would they have done to me?’ asked Frodo. ‘What were
the Riders trying to do?’
‘They tried to pierce your heart with a Morgul-knife which remains
in the wound. If they had succeeded, you would have become like
they are, only weaker and under their command. You would have
become a wraith under the dominion of the Dark Lord; and he would
have tormented you for trying to keep his Ring, if any greater torment
were possible than being robbed of it and seeing it on his hand.’
‘Thank goodness I did not realize the horrible danger!’ said Frodo
faintly. ‘I was mortally afraid, of course; but if I had known more, I
should not have dared even to move. It is a marvel that I escaped!’
‘Yes, fortune or fate have helped you,’ said Gandalf, ‘not to men-
tion courage. For your heart was not touched, and only your shoulder
was pierced; and that was because you resisted to the last. But it was
a terribly narrow shave, so to speak. You were in gravest peril while
you wore the Ring, for then you were half in the wraith-world yourself,
and they might have seized you. You could see them, and they could
see you.’
‘I know,’ said Frodo. ‘They were terrible to behold! But why could
we all see their horses?’
‘Because they are real horses; just as the black robes are real robes
that they wear to give shape to their nothingness when they have
dealings with the living.’
‘Then why do these black horses endure such riders? All other
animals are terriﬁed when they draw near, even the elf-horse of
Glorﬁndel. The dogs howl and the geese scream at them.’
‘Because these horses are born and bred to the service of the Dark
Lord in Mordor. Not all his servants and chattels are wraiths! There
are orcs and trolls, there are wargs and werewolves; and there have
been and still are many Men, warriors and kings, that walk alive
under the Sun, and yet are under his sway. And their number is
growing daily.’
‘What about Rivendell and the Elves? Is Rivendell safe?’
‘Yes, at present, until all else is conquered. The Elves may fear
the Dark Lord, and they may ﬂy before him, but never again will
they listen to him or serve him. And here in Rivendell there live still
some of his chief foes: the Elven-wise, lords of the Eldar from beyond
the furthest seas. They do not fear the Ringwraiths, for those who

have dwelt in the Blessed Realm live at once in both worlds, and
against both the Seen and the Unseen they have great power.’
‘I thought that I saw a white ﬁgure that shone and did not grow
dim like the others. Was that Glorﬁndel then?’
‘Yes, you saw him for a moment as he is upon the other side: one
of the mighty of the Firstborn. He is an Elf-lord of a house of princes.
Indeed there is a power in Rivendell to withstand the might of
Mordor, for a while: and elsewhere other powers still dwell. There
is power, too, of another kind in the Shire. But all such places will
soon become islands under siege, if things go on as they are going.
The Dark Lord is putting forth all his strength.
‘Still,’ he said, standing suddenly up and sticking out his chin,
while his beard went stiff and straight like bristling wire, ‘we must
keep up our courage. You will soon be well, if I do not talk you to
death. You are in Rivendell, and you need not worry about anything
for the present.’
‘I haven’t any courage to keep up,’ said Frodo, ‘but I am not
worried at the moment. Just give me news of my friends, and tell me
the end of the affair at the Ford, as I keep on asking, and I shall be
content for the present. After that I shall have another sleep, I think;
but I shan’t be able to close my eyes until you have ﬁnished the story
for me.’
Gandalf moved his chair to the bedside and took a good look at
Frodo. The colour had come back to his face, and his eyes were
clear, and fully awake and aware. He was smiling, and there seemed
to be little wrong with him. But to the wizard’s eye there was a faint
change, just a hint as it were of transparency, about him, and especi-
ally about the left hand that lay outside upon the coverlet.
‘Still that must be expected,’ said Gandalf to himself. ‘He is not
half through yet, and to what he will come in the end not even Elrond
can foretell. Not to evil, I think. He may become like a glass ﬁlled
with a clear light for eyes to see that can.’
‘You look splendid,’ he said aloud. ‘I will risk a brief tale without
consulting Elrond. But quite brief, mind you, and then you must
sleep again. This is what happened, as far as I can gather. The Riders
made straight for you, as soon as you ﬂed. They did not need the
guidance of their horses any longer: you had become visible to them,
being already on the threshold of their world. And also the Ring drew
them. Your friends sprang aside, off the road, or they would have
been ridden down. They knew that nothing could save you, if the
white horse could not. The Riders were too swift to overtake, and
too many to oppose. On foot even Glorﬁndel and Aragorn together
could not withstand all the Nine at once.
‘When the Ringwraiths swept by, your friends ran up behind.

Close to the Ford there is a small hollow beside the road masked by
a few stunted trees. There they hastily kindled ﬁre; for Glorﬁndel
knew that a ﬂood would come down, if the Riders tried to cross, and
then he would have to deal with any that were left on his side of the
river. The moment the ﬂood appeared, he rushed out, followed by
Aragorn and the others with ﬂaming brands. Caught between ﬁre
and water, and seeing an Elf-lord revealed in his wrath, they were
dismayed, and their horses were stricken with madness. Three were
carried away by the ﬁrst assault of the ﬂood; the others were now
hurled into the water by their horses and overwhelmed.’
‘And is that the end of the Black Riders?’ asked Frodo.
‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘Their horses must have perished, and without
them they are crippled. But the Ringwraiths themselves cannot be so
easily destroyed. However, there is nothing more to fear from them at
present. Your friends crossed after the ﬂood had passed and they found
you lying on your face at the top of the bank, with a broken sword under
you. The horse was standing guard beside you. You were pale and cold,
and they feared that you were dead, or worse. Elrond’s folk met them,
carrying you slowly towards Rivendell.’
‘Who made the ﬂood?’ asked Frodo.
‘Elrond commanded it,’ answered Gandalf. ‘The river of this valley
is under his power, and it will rise in anger when he has great need
to bar the Ford. As soon as the captain of the Ringwraiths rode into
the water the ﬂood was released. If I may say so, I added a few
touches of my own: you may not have noticed, but some of the waves
took the form of great white horses with shining white riders; and
there were many rolling and grinding boulders. For a moment I was
afraid that we had let loose too ﬁerce a wrath, and the ﬂood would
get out of hand and wash you all away. There is great vigour in the
waters that come down from the snows of the Misty Mountains.’
‘Yes, it all comes back to me now,’ said Frodo: ‘the tremendous
roaring. I thought I was drowning, with my friends and enemies and
all. But now we are safe!’
Gandalf looked quickly at Frodo, but he had shut his eyes. ‘Yes,
you are all safe for the present. Soon there will be feasting and merry-
making to celebrate the victory at the Ford of Bruinen, and you will
all be there in places of honour.’
‘Splendid!’ said Frodo. ‘It is wonderful that Elrond, and Glorﬁndel
and such great lords, not to mention Strider, should take so much
trouble and show me so much kindness.’
‘Well, there are many reasons why they should,’ said Gandalf,
smiling. ‘I am one good reason. The Ring is another: you are the
Ring-bearer. And you are the heir of Bilbo, the Ring-ﬁnder.’
‘Dear Bilbo!’ said Frodo sleepily. ‘I wonder where he is. I wish he

was here and could hear all about it. It would have made him laugh.
The cow jumped over the Moon! And the poor old troll!’ With that
he fell fast asleep.
Frodo was now safe in the Last Homely House east of the Sea.
That house was, as Bilbo had long ago reported, ‘a perfect house,
whether you like food or sleep or story-telling or singing, or just
sitting and thinking best, or a pleasant mixture of them all’. Merely
to be there was a cure for weariness, fear, and sadness.
As the evening drew on, Frodo woke up again, and he found that
he no longer felt in need of rest or sleep, but had a mind for food
and drink, and probably for singing and story-telling afterwards. He
got out of bed and discovered that his arm was already nearly as
useful again as it ever had been. He found laid ready clean garments
of green cloth that ﬁtted him excellently. Looking in a mirror he
was startled to see a much thinner reﬂection of himself than he
remembered: it looked remarkably like the young nephew of Bilbo
who used to go tramping with his uncle in the Shire; but the eyes
looked out at him thoughtfully.
‘Yes, you have seen a thing or two since you last peeped out of a
looking-glass,’ he said to his reﬂection. ‘But now for a merry meeting!’
He stretched out his arms and whistled a tune.
At that moment there was a knock on the door, and Sam came
in. He ran to Frodo and took his left hand, awkwardly and shyly. He
stroked it gently and then he blushed and turned hastily away.
‘Hullo, Sam!’ said Frodo.
‘It’s warm!’ said Sam. ‘Meaning your hand, Mr. Frodo. It has felt
so cold through the long nights. But glory and trumpets!’ he cried,
turning round again with shining eyes and dancing on the ﬂoor. ‘It’s
ﬁne to see you up and yourself again, sir! Gandalf asked me to come
and see if you were ready to come down, and I thought he was
joking.’
‘I am ready,’ said Frodo. ‘Let’s go and look for the rest of the
party!’
‘I can take you to them, sir,’ said Sam. ‘It’s a big house this, and
very peculiar. Always a bit more to discover, and no knowing what
you’ll ﬁnd round a corner. And Elves, sir! Elves here, and Elves there!
Some like kings, terrible and splendid; and some as merry as children.
And the music and the singing – not that I have had the time or the
heart for much listening since we got here. But I’m getting to know
some of the ways of the place.’
‘I know what you have been doing, Sam,’ said Frodo, taking his
arm. ‘But you shall be merry tonight, and listen to your heart’s
content. Come on, guide me round the corners!’

Sam led him along several passages and down many steps and out
into a high garden above the steep bank of the river. He found his
friends sitting in a porch on the side of the house looking east.
Shadows had fallen in the valley below, but there was still a light on
the faces of the mountains far above. The air was warm. The sound
of running and falling water was loud, and the evening was ﬁlled
with a faint scent of trees and ﬂowers, as if summer still lingered in
Elrond’s gardens.
‘Hurray!’ cried Pippin, springing up. ‘Here is our noble cousin!
Make way for Frodo, Lord of the Ring!’
‘Hush!’ said Gandalf from the shadows at the back of the porch.
‘Evil things do not come into this valley; but all the same we should
not name them. The Lord of the Ring is not Frodo, but the master
of the Dark Tower of Mordor, whose power is again stretching out
over the world. We are sitting in a fortress. Outside it is getting dark.’
‘Gandalf has been saying many cheerful things like that,’ said
Pippin. ‘He thinks I need keeping in order. But it seems impossible,
somehow, to feel gloomy or depressed in this place. I feel I could
sing, if I knew the right song for the occasion.’
‘I feel like singing myself,’ laughed Frodo. ‘Though at the moment
I feel more like eating and drinking.’
‘That will soon be cured,’ said Pippin. ‘You have shown your
usual cunning in getting up just in time for a meal.’
‘More than a meal! A feast!’ said Merry. ‘As soon as Gandalf
reported that you were recovered, the preparations began.’ He had
hardly ﬁnished speaking when they were summoned to the hall by
the ringing of many bells.
The hall of Elrond’s house was ﬁlled with folk: Elves for the most
part, though there were a few guests of other sorts. Elrond, as was
his custom, sat in a great chair at the end of the long table upon the
dais; and next to him on the one side sat Glorﬁndel, on the other
side sat Gandalf.
Frodo looked at them in wonder; for he had never before seen
Elrond, of whom so many tales spoke; and as they sat upon his right
hand and his left, Glorﬁndel, and even Gandalf, whom he thought
he knew so well, were revealed as lords of dignity and power.
Gandalf was shorter in stature than the other two; but his long
white hair, his sweeping silver beard, and his broad shoulders, made
him look like some wise king of ancient legend. In his aged face under
great snowy brows his dark eyes were set like coals that could leap
suddenly into ﬁre.
Glorﬁndel was tall and straight; his hair was of shining gold, his
face fair and young and fearless and full of joy; his eyes were bright

and keen, and his voice like music; on his brow sat wisdom, and in
his hand was strength.
The face of Elrond was ageless, neither old nor young, though in
it was written the memory of many things both glad and sorrowful.
His hair was dark as the shadows of twilight, and upon it was set a
circlet of silver; his eyes were grey as a clear evening, and in them
was a light like the light of stars. Venerable he seemed as a king
crowned with many winters, and yet hale as a tried warrior in the
fulness of his strength. He was the Lord of Rivendell and mighty
among both Elves and Men.
In the middle of the table, against the woven cloths upon the wall,
there was a chair under a canopy, and there sat a lady fair to look
upon, and so like was she in form of womanhood to Elrond that
Frodo guessed that she was one of his close kindred. Young she was
and yet not so. The braids of her dark hair were touched by no frost;
her white arms and clear face were ﬂawless and smooth, and the light
of stars was in her bright eyes, grey as a cloudless night; yet queenly
she looked, and thought and knowledge were in her glance, as of one
who has known many things that the years bring. Above her brow
her head was covered with a cap of silver lace netted with small gems,
glittering white; but her soft grey raiment had no ornament save a
girdle of leaves wrought in silver.
So it was that Frodo saw her whom few mortals had yet seen;
Arwen, daughter of Elrond, in whom it was said that the likeness of
Lu´thien had come on earth again; and she was called Undo´miel, for
she was the Evenstar of her people. Long she had been in the land
of her mother’s kin, in Lo´ rien beyond the mountains, and was but
lately returned to Rivendell to her father’s house. But her brothers,
Elladan and Elrohir, were out upon errantry; for they rode often far
aﬁeld with the Rangers of the North, forgetting never their mother’s
torment in the dens of the orcs.
Such loveliness in living thing Frodo had never seen before nor
imagined in his mind; and he was both surprised and abashed to ﬁnd
that he had a seat at Elrond’s table among all these folk so high and
fair. Though he had a suitable chair, and was raised upon several
cushions, he felt very small, and rather out of place; but that feeling
quickly passed. The feast was merry and the food all that his hunger
could desire. It was some time before he looked about him again or
even turned to his neighbours.
He looked ﬁrst for his friends. Sam had begged to be allowed to
wait on his master, but had been told that for this time he was a
guest of honour. Frodo could see him now, sitting with Pippin and
Merry at the upper end of one of the side-tables close to the dais.
He could see no sign of Strider.

Next to Frodo on his right sat a dwarf of important appearance,
richly dressed. His beard, very long and forked, was white, nearly as
white as the snow-white cloth of his garments. He wore a silver belt,
and round his neck hung a chain of silver and diamonds. Frodo
stopped eating to look at him.
‘Welcome and well met!’ said the dwarf, turning towards him.
Then he actually rose from his seat and bowed. ‘Glo´ in at your service,’
he said, and bowed still lower.
‘Frodo Baggins at your service and your family’s,’ said Frodo
correctly, rising in surprise and scattering his cushions. ‘Am I right
in guessing that you are the Glo´ in, one of the twelve companions of
the great Thorin Oakenshield?’
‘Quite right,’ answered the dwarf, gathering up the cushions and
courteously assisting Frodo back into his seat. ‘And I do not ask, for
I have already been told that you are the kinsman and adopted heir
of our friend Bilbo the renowned. Allow me to congratulate you on
your recovery.’
‘Thank you very much,’ said Frodo.
‘You have had some very strange adventures, I hear,’ said Glo´in.
‘I wonder greatly what brings four hobbits on so long a journey.
Nothing like it has happened since Bilbo came with us. But perhaps
I should not inquire too closely, since Elrond and Gandalf do not
seem disposed to talk of this?’
‘I think we will not speak of it, at least not yet,’ said Frodo politely.
He guessed that even in Elrond’s house the matter of the Ring was
not one for casual talk; and in any case he wished to forget his troubles
for a time. ‘But I am equally curious,’ he added, ‘to learn what brings
so important a dwarf so far from the Lonely Mountain.’
Glo´ in looked at him. ‘If you have not heard, I think we will not
speak yet of that either. Master Elrond will summon us all ere long,
I believe, and then we shall all hear many things. But there is much
else that may be told.’
Throughout the rest of the meal they talked together, but Frodo
listened more than he spoke; for the news of the Shire, apart from
the Ring, seemed small and far-away and unimportant, while Glo´ in
had much to tell of events in the northern regions of Wilderland.
Frodo learned that Grimbeorn the Old, son of Beorn, was now the
lord of many sturdy men, and to their land between the Mountains
and Mirkwood neither orc nor wolf dared to go.
‘Indeed,’ said Glo´in, ‘if it were not for the Beornings, the passage
from Dale to Rivendell would long ago have become impossible.
They are valiant men and keep open the High Pass and the Ford of
Carrock. But their tolls are high,’ he added with a shake of his head;
‘and like Beorn of old they are not over fond of dwarves. Still, they

are trusty, and that is much in these days. Nowhere are there any
men so friendly to us as the Men of Dale. They are good folk, the
Bardings. The grandson of Bard the Bowman rules them, Brand son
of Bain son of Bard. He is a strong king, and his realm now reaches
far south and east of Esgaroth.’
‘And what of your own people?’ asked Frodo.
‘There is much to tell, good and bad,’ said Glo´ in; ‘yet it is mostly
good: we have so far been fortunate, though we do not escape the
shadow of these times. If you really wish to hear of us, I will tell you
tidings gladly. But stop me when you are weary! Dwarves’ tongues
run on when speaking of their handiwork, they say.’
And with that Glo´in embarked on a long account of the doings
of the Dwarf-kingdom. He was delighted to have found so polite a
listener; for Frodo showed no sign of weariness and made no
attempt to change the subject, though actually he soon got rather
lost among the strange names of people and places that he had never
heard of before. He was interested, however, to hear that Da´in was
still King under the Mountain, and was now old (having passed his
two hundred and ﬁftieth year), venerable, and fabulously rich. Of
the ten companions who had survived the Battle of Five Armies seven
were still with him: Dwalin, Glo´in, Dori, Nori, Bifur, Bofur, and
Bombur. Bombur was now so fat that he could not move himself
from his couch to his chair at table, and it took six young dwarves
to lift him.
´
‘And what has become of Balin and Ori and Oin?’ asked Frodo.
A shadow passed over Glo´ in’s face. ‘We do not know,’ he
answered. ‘It is largely on account of Balin that I have come to ask
the advice of those that dwell in Rivendell. But tonight let us speak
of merrier things!’
Glo´ in began then to talk of the works of his people, telling Frodo
about their great labours in Dale and under the Mountain. ‘We have
done well,’ he said. ‘But in metal-work we cannot rival our fathers,
many of whose secrets are lost. We make good armour and keen
swords, but we cannot again make mail or blade to match those that
were made before the dragon came. Only in mining and building
have we surpassed the old days. You should see the waterways of
Dale, Frodo, and the fountains, and the pools! You should see the
stone-paved roads of many colours! And the halls and cavernous
streets under the earth with arches carved like trees; and the terraces
and towers upon the Mountain’s sides! Then you would see that we
have not been idle.’
‘I will come and see them, if ever I can,’ said Frodo. ‘How surprised
Bilbo would have been to see all the changes in the Desolation of
Smaug!’

Glo´ in looked at Frodo and smiled. ‘You were very fond of Bilbo
were you not?’ he asked.
‘Yes,’ answered Frodo. ‘I would rather see him than all the towers
and palaces in the world.’
At length the feast came to an end. Elrond and Arwen rose and
went down the hall, and the company followed them in due order.
The doors were thrown open, and they went across a wide passage
and through other doors, and came into a further hall. In it were no
tables, but a bright ﬁre was burning in a great hearth between the
carven pillars upon either side.
Frodo found himself walking with Gandalf. ‘This is the Hall of
Fire,’ said the wizard. ‘Here you will hear many songs and tales – if
you can keep awake. But except on high days it usually stands empty
and quiet, and people come here who wish for peace, and thought.
There is always a ﬁre here, all the year round, but there is little other
light.’
As Elrond entered and went towards the seat prepared for him,
Elvish minstrels began to make sweet music. Slowly the hall ﬁlled,
and Frodo looked with delight upon the many fair faces that were
gathered together; the golden ﬁrelight played upon them and shim-
mered in their hair. Suddenly he noticed, not far from the further
end of the ﬁre, a small dark ﬁgure seated on a stool with his back
propped against a pillar. Beside him on the ground was a drinking-cup
and some bread. Frodo wondered whether he was ill (if people were
ever ill in Rivendell), and had been unable to come to the feast. His
head seemed sunk in sleep on his breast, and a fold of his dark cloak
was drawn over his face.
Elrond went forward and stood beside the silent ﬁgure. ‘Awake,
little master!’ he said, with a smile. Then, turning to Frodo, he
beckoned to him. ‘Now at last the hour has come that you have
wished for, Frodo,’ he said. ‘Here is a friend that you have long
missed.’
The dark ﬁgure raised its head and uncovered its face.
‘Bilbo!’ cried Frodo with sudden recognition, and he sprang
forward.
‘Hullo, Frodo my lad!’ said Bilbo. ‘So you have got here at last.
I hoped you would manage it. Well, well! So all this feasting is in
your honour, I hear. I hope you enjoyed yourself ?’
‘Why weren’t you there?’ cried Frodo. ‘And why haven’t I been
allowed to see you before?’
‘Because you were asleep. I have seen a good deal of you. I have
sat by your side with Sam each day. But as for the feast, I don’t go
in for such things much now. And I had something else to do.’

‘What were you doing?’
‘Why, sitting and thinking. I do a lot of that nowadays, and this
is the best place to do it in, as a rule. Wake up, indeed!’ he said,
cocking an eye at Elrond. There was a bright twinkle in it and no
sign of sleepiness that Frodo could see. ‘Wake up! I was not asleep,
Master Elrond. If you want to know, you have all come out from
your feast too soon, and you have disturbed me – in the middle of
making up a song. I was stuck over a line or two, and was thinking
about them; but now I don’t suppose I shall ever get them right.
There will be such a deal of singing that the ideas will be driven clean
out of my head. I shall have to get my friend the Du´nadan to help
me. Where is he?’
Elrond laughed. ‘He shall be found,’ he said. ‘Then you two shall
go into a corner and ﬁnish your task, and we will hear it and judge
it before we end our merrymaking.’ Messengers were sent to ﬁnd
Bilbo’s friend, though none knew where he was, or why he had not
been present at the feast.
In the meanwhile Frodo and Bilbo sat side by side, and Sam came
quickly and placed himself near them. They talked together in soft
voices, oblivious of the mirth and music in the hall about them.
Bilbo had not much to say of himself. When he had left Hobbiton
he had wandered off aimlessly, along the Road or in the country
on either side; but somehow he had steered all the time towards
Rivendell.
‘I got here without much adventure,’ he said, ‘and after a rest I
went on with the dwarves to Dale: my last journey. I shan’t travel
again. Old Balin had gone away. Then I came back here, and here
I have been. I have done this and that. I have written some more of
my book. And, of course, I make up a few songs. They sing them
occasionally: just to please me, I think; for, of course, they aren’t
really good enough for Rivendell. And I listen and I think. Time
doesn’t seem to pass here: it just is. A remarkable place altogether.
‘I hear all kinds of news, from over the Mountains, and out of the
South, but hardly anything from the Shire. I heard about the Ring,
of course. Gandalf has been here often. Not that he has told me a
great deal, he has become closer than ever these last few years. The
Du´nadan has told me more. Fancy that ring of mine causing such a
disturbance! It is a pity that Gandalf did not ﬁnd out more sooner.
I could have brought the thing here myself long ago without so much
trouble. I have thought several times of going back to Hobbiton for
it; but I am getting old, and they would not let me: Gandalf and
Elrond, I mean. They seemed to think that the Enemy was looking
high and low for me, and would make mincemeat of me, if he caught
me tottering about in the Wild.

‘And Gandalf said: ‘‘The Ring has passed on, Bilbo. It would do
no good to you or to others, if you tried to meddle with it again.’’
Odd sort of remark, just like Gandalf. But he said he was looking
after you, so I let things be. I am frightfully glad to see you safe and
sound.’ He paused and looked at Frodo doubtfully.
‘Have you got it here?’ he asked in a whisper. ‘I can’t help feeling
curious, you know, after all I’ve heard. I should very much like just
to peep at it again.’
‘Yes, I’ve got it,’ answered Frodo, feeling a strange reluctance. ‘It
looks just the same as ever it did.’
‘Well, I should just like to see it for a moment,’ said Bilbo.
When he had dressed, Frodo found that while he slept the Ring
had been hung about his neck on a new chain, light but strong.
Slowly he drew it out. Bilbo put out his hand. But Frodo quickly
drew back the Ring. To his distress and amazement he found that
he was no longer looking at Bilbo; a shadow seemed to have fallen
between them, and through it he found himself eyeing a little wrinkled
creature with a hungry face and bony groping hands. He felt a desire
to strike him.
The music and singing round them seemed to falter, and a silence
fell. Bilbo looked quickly at Frodo’s face and passed his hand across
his eyes. ‘I understand now,’ he said. ‘Put it away! I am sorry: sorry
you have come in for this burden; sorry about everything. Don’t
adventures ever have an end? I suppose not. Someone else always
has to carry on the story. Well, it can’t be helped. I wonder if it’s
any good trying to ﬁnish my book? But don’t let’s worry about it
now – let’s have some real News! Tell me all about the Shire!’
Frodo hid the Ring away, and the shadow passed leaving hardly
a shred of memory. The light and music of Rivendell was about him
again. Bilbo smiled and laughed happily. Every item of news from
the Shire that Frodo could tell – aided and corrected now and again
by Sam – was of the greatest interest to him, from the felling of the
least tree to the pranks of the smallest child in Hobbiton. They were
so deep in the doings of the Four Farthings that they did not notice
the arrival of a man clad in dark green cloth. For many minutes he
stood looking down at them with a smile.
Suddenly Bilbo looked up. ‘Ah, there you are at last, Du´nadan!’
he cried.
‘Strider!’ said Frodo. ‘You seem to have a lot of names.’
‘Well, Strider is one that I haven’t heard before, anyway,’ said
Bilbo. ‘What do you call him that for?’
‘They call me that in Bree,’ said Strider laughing, ‘and that is how
I was introduced to him.’

‘And why do you call him Du´nadan?’ asked Frodo.
‘The Du´ nadan,’ said Bilbo. ‘He is often called that here. But I
thought you knew enough Elvish at least to know du´n-adan: Man of
the West, Nu´meno´ rean. But this is not the time for lessons!’ He
turned to Strider. ‘Where have you been, my friend? Why weren’t
you at the feast? The Lady Arwen was there.’
Strider looked down at Bilbo gravely. ‘I know,’ he said. ‘But often
I must put mirth aside. Elladan and Elrohir have returned out of the
Wild unlooked-for, and they had tidings that I wished to hear at
once.’
‘Well, my dear fellow,’ said Bilbo, ‘now you’ve heard the news,
can’t you spare me a moment? I want your help in something urgent.
Elrond says this song of mine is to be ﬁnished before the end of
the evening, and I am stuck. Let’s go off into a corner and polish it
up!’
Strider smiled. ‘Come then!’ he said. ‘Let me hear it!’
Frodo was left to himself for a while, for Sam had fallen asleep.
He was alone and felt rather forlorn, although all about him the folk
of Rivendell were gathered. But those near him were silent, intent
upon the music of the voices and the instruments, and they gave no
heed to anything else. Frodo began to listen.
At ﬁrst the beauty of the melodies and of the interwoven words
in elven-tongues, even though he understood them little, held him
in a spell, as soon as he began to attend to them. Almost it seemed
that the words took shape, and visions of far lands and bright things
that he had never yet imagined opened out before him; and the ﬁrelit
hall became like a golden mist above seas of foam that sighed upon
the margins of the world. Then the enchantment became more and
more dreamlike, until he felt that an endless river of swelling gold
and silver was ﬂowing over him, too multitudinous for its pattern to
be comprehended; it became part of the throbbing air about him,
and it drenched and drowned him. Swiftly he sank under its shining
weight into a deep realm of sleep.
There he wandered long in a dream of music that turned into
running water, and then suddenly into a voice. It seemed to be the
voice of Bilbo chanting verses. Faint at ﬁrst and then clearer ran the
words.
Ea¨rendil was a mariner
that tarried in Arvernien;
he built a boat of timber felled
in Nimbrethil to journey in;

her sails he wove of silver fair,
of silver were her lanterns made,
her prow he fashioned like a swan,
and light upon her banners laid.
In panoply of ancient kings,
in chaine´d rings he armoured him;
his shining shield was scored with runes
to ward all wounds and harm from him;
his bow was made of dragon-horn,
his arrows shorn of ebony,
of silver was his habergeon,
his scabbard of chalcedony;
his sword of steel was valiant,
of adamant his helmet tall,
an eagle-plume upon his crest,
upon his breast an emerald.
Beneath the Moon and under star
he wandered far from northern strands,
bewildered on enchanted ways
beyond the days of mortal lands.
From gnashing of the Narrow Ice
where shadow lies on frozen hills,
from nether heats and burning waste
he turned in haste, and roving still
on starless waters far astray
at last he came to Night of Naught,
and passed, and never sight he saw
of shining shore nor light he sought.
The winds of wrath came driving him,
and blindly in the foam he ﬂed
from west to east, and errandless,
unheralded he homeward sped.
There ﬂying Elwing came to him,
and ﬂame was in the darkness lit;
more bright than light of diamond
the ﬁre upon her carcanet.
The Silmaril she bound on him
and crowned him with the living light,
and dauntless then with burning brow
he turned his prow; and in the night
from Otherworld beyond the Sea

there strong and free a storm arose,
a wind of power in Tarmenel;
by paths that seldom mortal goes
his boat it bore with biting breath
as might of death across the grey
and long-forsaken seas distressed:
from east to west he passed away.
Through Evernight he back was borne
on black and roaring waves that ran
o’er leagues unlit and foundered shores
that drowned before the Days began,
until he heard on strands of pearl
where ends the world the music long,
where ever-foaming billows roll
the yellow gold and jewels wan.
He saw the Mountain silent rise
where twilight lies upon the knees
of Valinor, and Eldamar
beheld afar beyond the seas.
A wanderer escaped from night
to haven white he came at last,
to Elvenhome the green and fair
where keen the air, where pale as glass
beneath the Hill of Ilmarin
a-glimmer in a valley sheer
the lamplit towers of Tirion
are mirrored on the Shadowmere.
He tarried there from errantry,
and melodies they taught to him,
and sages old him marvels told,
and harps of gold they brought to him.
They clothed him then in elven-white,
and seven lights before him sent,
as through the Calacirian
to hidden land forlorn he went.
He came unto the timeless halls
where shining fall the countless years,
and endless reigns the Elder King
in Ilmarin on Mountain sheer;
and words unheard were spoken then
of folk of Men and Elven-kin,

beyond the world were visions showed
forbid to those that dwell therein.
A ship then new they built for him
of mithril and of elven-glass
with shining prow; no shaven oar
nor sail she bore on silver mast:
the Silmaril as lantern light
and banner bright with living ﬂame
to gleam thereon by Elbereth
herself was set, who thither came
and wings immortal made for him,
and laid on him undying doom,
to sail the shoreless skies and come
behind the Sun and light of Moon.
From Evereven’s lofty hills
where softly silver fountains fall
his wings him bore, a wandering light,
beyond the mighty Mountain Wall.
From World’s End then he turned away,
and yearned again to ﬁnd afar
his home through shadows journeying,
and burning as an island star
on high above the mists he came,
a distant ﬂame before the Sun,
a wonder ere the waking dawn
where grey the Norland waters run.
And over Middle-earth he passed
and heard at last the weeping sore
of women and of elven-maids
in Elder Days, in years of yore.
But on him mighty doom was laid,
till Moon should fade, an orbe´d star
to pass, and tarry never more
on Hither Shores where mortals are;
for ever still a herald on
an errand that should never rest
to bear his shining lamp afar,
the Flammifer of Westernesse.
The chanting ceased. Frodo opened his eyes and saw that Bilbo
was seated on his stool in a circle of listeners, who were smiling and
applauding.

‘Now we had better have it again,’ said an Elf.
Bilbo got up and bowed. ‘I am ﬂattered, Lindir,’ he said. ‘But it
would be too tiring to repeat it all.’
‘Not too tiring for you,’ the Elves answered laughing. ‘You know
you are never tired of reciting your own verses. But really we cannot
answer your question at one hearing!’
‘What!’ cried Bilbo. ‘You can’t tell which parts were mine, and
which were the Du´nadan’s?’
‘It is not easy for us to tell the difference between two mortals,’
said the Elf.
‘Nonsense, Lindir,’ snorted Bilbo. ‘If you can’t distinguish be-
tween a Man and a Hobbit, your judgement is poorer than I imagined.
They’re as different as peas and apples.’
‘Maybe. To sheep other sheep no doubt appear different,’ laughed
Lindir. ‘Or to shepherds. But Mortals have not been our study. We
have other business.’
‘I won’t argue with you,’ said Bilbo. ‘I am sleepy after so much
music and singing. I’ll leave you to guess, if you want to.’
He got up and came towards Frodo. ‘Well, that’s over,’ he said
in a low voice. ‘It went off better than I expected. I don’t often get
asked for a second hearing. What did you think of it?’
‘I am not going to try and guess,’ said Frodo smiling.
‘You needn’t,’ said Bilbo. ‘As a matter of fact it was all mine.
Except that Aragorn insisted on my putting in a green stone. He
seemed to think it important. I don’t know why. Otherwise he obvi-
ously thought the whole thing rather above my head, and he said
that if I had the cheek to make verses about Ea¨rendil in the house
of Elrond, it was my affair. I suppose he was right.’
‘I don’t know,’ said Frodo. ‘It seemed to me to ﬁt somehow,
though I can’t explain. I was half asleep when you began, and it
seemed to follow on from something that I was dreaming about. I
didn’t understand that it was really you speaking until near the end.’
‘It is difﬁcult to keep awake here, until you get used to it,’ said
Bilbo. ‘Not that hobbits would ever acquire quite the Elvish appetite
for music and poetry and tales. They seem to like them as much as
food, or more. They will be going on for a long time yet. What do
you say to slipping off for some more quiet talk?’
‘Can we?’ said Frodo.
‘Of course. This is merrymaking not business. Come and go as
you like, as long as you don’t make a noise.’
They got up and withdrew quietly into the shadows, and made
for the doors. Sam they left behind, fast asleep still with a smile on
his face. In spite of his delight in Bilbo’s company Frodo felt a tug

of regret as they passed out of the Hall of Fire. Even as they stepped
over the threshold a single clear voice rose in song.
A Elbereth Gilthoniel,
silivren penna mı´riel
o menel aglar elenath!
Na-chaered palan-dı´riel
o galadhremmin ennorath,
Fanuilos, le linnathon
nef aear, sı´ nef aearon!
Frodo halted for a moment, looking back. Elrond was in his chair
and the ﬁre was on his face like summer-light upon the trees. Near
him sat the Lady Arwen. To his surprise Frodo saw that Aragorn
stood beside her; his dark cloak was thrown back, and he seemed to
be clad in elven-mail, and a star shone on his breast. They spoke
together, and then suddenly it seemed to Frodo that Arwen turned
towards him, and the light of her eyes fell on him from afar and
pierced his heart.
He stood still enchanted, while the sweet syllables of the Elvish
song fell like clear jewels of blended word and melody. ‘It is a song
to Elbereth,’ said Bilbo. ‘They will sing that, and other songs of the
Blessed Realm, many times tonight. Come on!’
He led Frodo back to his own little room. It opened on to the
gardens and looked south across the ravine of the Bruinen. There
they sat for some while, looking through the window at the bright
stars above the steep-climbing woods, and talking softly. They spoke
no more of the small news of the Shire far away, nor of the dark
shadows and perils that encompassed them, but of the fair things
they had seen in the world together, of the Elves, of the stars, of
trees, and the gentle fall of the bright year in the woods.
At last there came a knock on the door. ‘Begging your pardon,’
said Sam, putting in his head, ‘but I was just wondering if you would
be wanting anything.’
‘And begging yours, Sam Gamgee,’ replied Bilbo. ‘I guess you
mean that it is time your master went to bed.’
‘Well, sir, there is a Council early tomorrow, I hear, and he only
got up today for the ﬁrst time.’
‘Quite right, Sam,’ laughed Bilbo. ‘You can trot off and tell Gandalf
that he has gone to bed. Good night, Frodo! Bless me, but it has been
good to see you again! There are no folk like hobbits after all for a real
good talk. I am getting very old, and I began to wonder if I should live
to see your chapters of our story. Good night! I’ll take a walk, I think,
and look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!’

Chapter 2
T H E  C O U N C I L  O F  E L R O N D
Next day Frodo woke early, feeling refreshed and well. He walked
along the terraces above the loud-ﬂowing Bruinen and watched the
pale, cool sun rise above the far mountains, and shine down, slanting
through the thin silver mist; the dew upon the yellow leaves was
glimmering, and the woven nets of gossamer twinkled on every bush.
Sam walked beside him, saying nothing, but snifﬁng the air, and
looking every now and again with wonder in his eyes at the great
heights in the East. The snow was white upon their peaks.
On a seat cut in the stone beside a turn in the path they came
upon Gandalf and Bilbo deep in talk. ‘Hullo! Good morning!’ said
Bilbo. ‘Feel ready for the great council?’
‘I feel ready for anything,’ answered Frodo. ‘But most of all I
should like to go walking today and explore the valley. I should like
to get into those pine-woods up there.’ He pointed away far up the
side of Rivendell to the north.
‘You may have a chance later,’ said Gandalf. ‘But we cannot make
any plans yet. There is much to hear and decide today.’
Suddenly as they were talking a single clear bell rang out. ‘That
is the warning bell for the Council of Elrond,’ cried Gandalf. ‘Come
along now! Both you and Bilbo are wanted.’
Frodo and Bilbo followed the wizard quickly along the winding
path back to the house; behind them, uninvited and for the moment
forgotten, trotted Sam.
Gandalf led them to the porch where Frodo had found his friends
the evening before. The light of the clear autumn morning was now
glowing in the valley. The noise of bubbling waters came up from
the foaming river-bed. Birds were singing, and a wholesome peace
lay on the land. To Frodo his dangerous ﬂight, and the rumours of
the darkness growing in the world outside, already seemed only the
memories of a troubled dream; but the faces that were turned to
meet them as they entered were grave.
Elrond was there, and several others were seated in silence about
him. Frodo saw Glorﬁndel and Glo´in; and in a corner alone Strider
was sitting, clad in his old travel-worn clothes again. Elrond drew
Frodo to a seat by his side, and presented him to the company,
saying:
‘Here, my friends, is the hobbit, Frodo son of Drogo. Few have

ever come hither through greater peril or on an errand more urgent.’
He then pointed out and named those whom Frodo had not met
before. There was a younger dwarf at Glo´in’s side: his son Gimli.
Beside Glorﬁndel there were several other counsellors of Elrond’s
household, of whom Erestor was the chief; and with him was Galdor,
an Elf from the Grey Havens who had come on an errand from
Cı´rdan the Shipwright. There was also a strange Elf clad in green
and brown, Legolas, a messenger from his father, Thranduil, the
King of the Elves of Northern Mirkwood. And seated a little apart
was a tall man with a fair and noble face, dark-haired and grey-eyed,
proud and stern of glance.
He was cloaked and booted as if for a journey on horseback; and
indeed though his garments were rich, and his cloak was lined with
fur, they were stained with long travel. He had a collar of silver in
which a single white stone was set; his locks were shorn about his
shoulders. On a baldric he wore a great horn tipped with silver that
now was laid upon his knees. He gazed at Frodo and Bilbo with
sudden wonder.
‘Here,’ said Elrond, turning to Gandalf, ‘is Boromir, a man from
the South. He arrived in the grey morning, and seeks for counsel. I
have bidden him to be present, for here his questions will be
answered.’
Not all that was spoken and debated in the Council need now be
told. Much was said of events in the world outside, especially in the
South, and in the wide lands east of the Mountains. Of these things
Frodo had already heard many rumours; but the tale of Glo´ in was
new to him, and when the dwarf spoke he listened attentively. It
appeared that amid the splendour of their works of hand the hearts
of the Dwarves of the Lonely Mountain were troubled.
‘It is now many years ago,’ said Glo´in, ‘that a shadow of disquiet
fell upon our people. Whence it came we did not at ﬁrst perceive.
Words began to be whispered in secret: it was said that we were
hemmed in a narrow place, and that greater wealth and splendour
would be found in a wider world. Some spoke of Moria: the mighty
works of our fathers that are called in our own tongue Khazad-duˆm;
and they declared that now at last we had the power and numbers
to return.’
Glo´ in sighed. ‘Moria! Moria! Wonder of the Northern world! Too
deep we delved there, and woke the nameless fear. Long have its vast
mansions lain empty since the children of Durin ﬂed. But now we
spoke of it again with longing, and yet with dread; for no dwarf has
dared to pass the doors of Khazad-duˆm for many lives of kings, save
Thro´r only, and he perished. At last, however, Balin listened to the

whispers, and resolved to go; and though Da´in did not give leave
´
willingly, he took with him Ori and Oin and many of our folk, and
they went away south.
‘That was nigh on thirty years ago. For a while we had news and
it seemed good: messages reported that Moria had been entered and
a great work begun there. Then there was silence, and no word has
ever come from Moria since.
‘Then about a year ago a messenger came to Da´in, but not from
Moria – from Mordor: a horseman in the night, who called Da´in to
his gate. The Lord Sauron the Great, so he said, wished for our
friendship. Rings he would give for it, such as he gave of old. And
he asked urgently concerning hobbits, of what kind they were, and
where they dwelt. ‘‘For Sauron knows,’’ said he, ‘‘that one of these
was known to you on a time.’’
‘At this we were greatly troubled, and we gave no answer. And
then his fell voice was lowered, and he would have sweetened it if
he could. ‘‘As a small token only of your friendship Sauron asks
this,’’ he said: ‘‘that you should ﬁnd this thief,’’ such was his word,
‘‘and get from him, willing or no, a little ring, the least of rings, that
once he stole. It is but a triﬂe that Sauron fancies, and an earnest of
your good will. Find it, and three rings that the Dwarf-sires possessed
of old shall be returned to you, and the realm of Moria shall be yours
for ever. Find only news of the thief, whether he still lives and where,
and you shall have great reward and lasting friendship from the Lord.
Refuse, and things will not seem so well. Do you refuse?’’
‘At that his breath came like the hiss of snakes, and all who stood
by shuddered, but Da´in said: ‘‘I say neither yea nor nay. I must
consider this message and what it means under its fair cloak.’’
‘ ‘‘Consider well, but not too long,’’ said he.
‘ ‘‘The time of my thought is my own to spend,’’ answered Da´in.
‘ ‘‘For the present,’’ said he, and rode into the darkness.
‘Heavy have the hearts of our chieftains been since that night. We
needed not the fell voice of the messenger to warn us that his words
held both menace and deceit; for we knew already that the power
that has re-entered Mordor has not changed, and ever it betrayed us
of old. Twice the messenger has returned, and has gone unanswered.
The third and last time, so he says, is soon to come, before the ending
of the year.
‘And so I have been sent at last by Da´in to warn Bilbo that he is
sought by the Enemy, and to learn, if may be, why he desires this
ring, this least of rings. Also we crave the advice of Elrond. For the
Shadow grows and draws nearer. We discover that messengers have
come also to King Brand in Dale, and that he is afraid. We fear that
he may yield. Already war is gathering on his eastern borders. If we

make no answer, the Enemy may move Men of his rule to assail King
Brand, and Da´in also.’
‘You have done well to come,’ said Elrond. ‘You will hear today
all that you need in order to understand the purposes of the Enemy.
There is naught that you can do, other than to resist, with hope or
without it. But you do not stand alone. You will learn that your
trouble is but part of the trouble of all the western world. The Ring!
What shall we do with the Ring, the least of rings, the triﬂe that
Sauron fancies? That is the doom that we must deem.
‘That is the purpose for which you are called hither. Called, I say,
though I have not called you to me, strangers from distant lands.
You have come and are here met, in this very nick of time, by chance
as it may seem. Yet it is not so. Believe rather that it is so ordered
that we, who sit here, and none others, must now ﬁnd counsel for
the peril of the world.
‘Now, therefore, things shall be openly spoken that have been
hidden from all but a few until this day. And ﬁrst, so that all may
understand what is the peril, the Tale of the Ring shall be told from
the beginning even to this present. And I will begin that tale, though
others shall end it.’
Then all listened while Elrond in his clear voice spoke of Sauron
and the Rings of Power, and their forging in the Second Age of the
world long ago. A part of his tale was known to some there, but the
full tale to none, and many eyes were turned to Elrond in fear and
wonder as he told of the Elven-smiths of Eregion and their friendship
with Moria, and their eagerness for knowledge, by which Sauron
ensnared them. For in that time he was not yet evil to behold, and
they received his aid and grew mighty in craft, whereas he learned
all their secrets, and betrayed them, and forged secretly in the Moun-
tain of Fire the One Ring to be their master. But Celebrimbor was
aware of him, and hid the Three which he had made; and there was
war, and the land was laid waste, and the gate of Moria was shut.
Then through all the years that followed he traced the Ring; but
since that history is elsewhere recounted, even as Elrond himself set
it down in his books of lore, it is not here recalled. For it is a long
tale, full of deeds great and terrible, and brieﬂy though Elrond spoke,
the sun rode up the sky, and the morning was passing ere he ceased.
Of Nu´menor he spoke, its glory and its fall, and the return of the
Kings of Men to Middle-earth out of the deeps of the Sea, borne
upon the wings of storm. Then Elendil the Tall and his mighty sons,
Isildur and Ana´rion, became great lords; and the North-realm they
made in Arnor, and the South-realm in Gondor above the mouths
of Anduin. But Sauron of Mordor assailed them, and they made the

Last Alliance of Elves and Men, and the hosts of Gil-galad and
Elendil were mustered in Arnor.
Thereupon Elrond paused a while and sighed. ‘I remember well
the splendour of their banners,’ he said. ‘It recalled to me the glory
of the Elder Days and the hosts of Beleriand, so many great princes
and captains were assembled. And yet not so many, nor so fair, as
when Thangorodrim was broken, and the Elves deemed that evil was
ended for ever, and it was not so.’
‘You remember?’ said Frodo, speaking his thought aloud in his
astonishment. ‘But I thought,’ he stammered as Elrond turned
towards him, ‘I thought that the fall of Gil-galad was a long age ago.’
‘So it was indeed,’ answered Elrond gravely. ‘But my memory
reaches back even to the Elder Days. Ea¨rendil was my sire, who was
born in Gondolin before its fall; and my mother was Elwing, daughter
of Dior, son of Lu´thien of Doriath. I have seen three ages in the
West of the world, and many defeats, and many fruitless victories.
‘I was the herald of Gil-galad and marched with his host. I was at
the Battle of Dagorlad before the Black Gate of Mordor, where we
had the mastery: for the Spear of Gil-galad and the Sword of Elendil,
Aeglos and Narsil, none could withstand. I beheld the last combat
on the slopes of Orodruin, where Gil-galad died, and Elendil fell,
and Narsil broke beneath him; but Sauron himself was overthrown,
and Isildur cut the Ring from his hand with the hilt-shard of his
father’s sword, and took it for his own.’
At this the stranger, Boromir, broke in. ‘So that is what became
of the Ring!’ he cried. ‘If ever such a tale was told in the South, it
has long been forgotten. I have heard of the Great Ring of him that
we do not name; but we believed that it perished from the world in
the ruin of his ﬁrst realm. Isildur took it! That is tidings indeed.’
‘Alas! yes,’ said Elrond. ‘Isildur took it, as should not have been.
It should have been cast then into Orodruin’s ﬁre nigh at hand where
it was made. But few marked what Isildur did. He alone stood by
his father in that last mortal contest; and by Gil-galad only Cı´rdan
stood, and I. But Isildur would not listen to our counsel.
‘ ‘‘This I will have as weregild for my father, and my brother,’’ he
said; and therefore whether we would or no, he took it to treasure
it. But soon he was betrayed by it to his death; and so it is named
in the North Isildur’s Bane. Yet death maybe was better than what
else might have befallen him.
‘Only to the North did these tidings come, and only to a few.
Small wonder is it that you have not heard them, Boromir. From the
ruin of the Gladden Fields, where Isildur perished, three men only
came ever back over the mountains after long wandering. One of
these was Ohtar, the esquire of Isildur, who bore the shards of the

sword of Elendil; and he brought them to Valandil, the heir of Isildur,
who being but a child had remained here in Rivendell. But Narsil
was broken and its light extinguished, and it has not yet been forged
again.
‘Fruitless did I call the victory of the Last Alliance? Not wholly
so, yet it did not achieve its end. Sauron was diminished, but not
destroyed. His Ring was lost but not unmade. The Dark Tower was
broken, but its foundations were not removed; for they were made
with the power of the Ring, and while it remains they will endure.
Many Elves and many mighty Men, and many of their friends, had
perished in the war. Ana´rion was slain, and Isildur was slain; and
Gil-galad and Elendil were no more. Never again shall there be any
such league of Elves and Men; for Men multiply and the Firstborn
decrease, and the two kindreds are estranged. And ever since that
day the race of Nu´menor has decayed, and the span of their years
has lessened.
‘In the North after the war and the slaughter of the Gladden
Fields the Men of Westernesse were diminished, and their city of
Annu´minas beside Lake Evendim fell into ruin; and the heirs of
Valandil removed and dwelt at Fornost on the high North Downs,
and that now too is desolate. Men call it Deadmen’s Dike, and they
fear to tread there. For the folk of Arnor dwindled, and their foes
devoured them, and their lordship passed, leaving only green mounds
in the grassy hills.
‘In the South the realm of Gondor long endured; and for a while
its splendour grew, recalling somewhat of the might of Nu´menor,
ere it fell. High towers that people built, and strong places, and
havens of many ships; and the winged crown of the Kings of Men
was held in awe by folk of many tongues. Their chief city was Osgili-
ath, Citadel of the Stars, through the midst of which the River ﬂowed.
And Minas Ithil they built, Tower of the Rising Moon, eastward
upon a shoulder of the Mountains of Shadow; and westward at the
feet of the White Mountains Minas Anor they made, Tower of the
Setting Sun. There in the courts of the King grew a white tree, from
the seed of that tree which Isildur brought over the deep waters, and
the seed of that tree before came from Eresse¨a, and before that out
of the Uttermost West in the Day before days when the world was
young.
‘But in the wearing of the swift years of Middle-earth the line of
Meneldil son of Ana´rion failed, and the Tree withered, and the blood
of the Nu´meno´reans became mingled with that of lesser men. Then
the watch upon the walls of Mordor slept, and dark things crept back
to Gorgoroth. And on a time evil things came forth, and they took
Minas Ithil and abode in it, and they made it into a place of dread;

and it is called Minas Morgul, the Tower of Sorcery. Then Minas
Anor was named anew Minas Tirith, the Tower of Guard; and these
two cities were ever at war, but Osgiliath which lay between was
deserted and in its ruins shadows walked.
‘So it has been for many lives of men. But the Lords of Minas
Tirith still ﬁght on, defying our enemies, keeping the passage of the
River from Argonath to the Sea. And now that part of the tale that
I shall tell is drawn to its close. For in the days of Isildur the Ruling
Ring passed out of all knowledge, and the Three were released from
its dominion. But now in this latter day they are in peril once more,
for to our sorrow the One has been found. Others shall speak of its
ﬁnding, for in that I played small part.’
He ceased, but at once Boromir stood up, tall and proud, before
them. ‘Give me leave, Master Elrond,’ said he, ‘ﬁrst to say more of
Gondor, for verily from the land of Gondor I am come. And it would
be well for all to know what passes there. For few, I deem, know of
our deeds, and therefore guess little at their peril, if we should fail
at last.
‘Believe not that in the land of Gondor the blood of Nu´menor is
spent, nor all its pride and dignity forgotten. By our valour the wild
folk of the East are still restrained, and the terror of Morgul kept at
bay; and thus alone are peace and freedom maintained in the lands
behind us, bulwark of the West. But if the passages of the River
should be won, what then?
‘Yet that hour, maybe, is not now far away. The Nameless Enemy
has arisen again. Smoke rises once more from Orodruin that we call
Mount Doom. The power of the Black Land grows and we are hard
beset. When the Enemy returned our folk were driven from Ithilien,
our fair domain east of the River, though we kept a foothold there
and strength of arms. But this very year, in the days of June, sudden
war came upon us out of Mordor, and we were swept away. We were
outnumbered, for Mordor has allied itself with the Easterlings and
the cruel Haradrim; but it was not by numbers that we were defeated.
A power was there that we have not felt before.
‘Some said that it could be seen, like a great black horseman, a
dark shadow under the moon. Wherever he came a madness ﬁlled
our foes, but fear fell on our boldest, so that horse and man gave
way and ﬂed. Only a remnant of our eastern force came back,
destroying the last bridge that still stood amid the ruins of Osgiliath.
‘I was in the company that held the bridge, until it was cast down
behind us. Four only were saved by swimming: my brother and myself
and two others. But still we ﬁght on, holding all the west shores of
Anduin; and those who shelter behind us give us praise, if ever they

hear our name: much praise but little help. Only from Rohan now
will any men ride to us when we call.
‘In this evil hour I have come on an errand over many dangerous
leagues to Elrond: a hundred and ten days I have journeyed all alone.
But I do not seek allies in war. The might of Elrond is in wisdom
not in weapons, it is said. I come to ask for counsel and the unravelling
of hard words. For on the eve of the sudden assault a dream came
to my brother in a troubled sleep; and afterwards a like dream came
oft to him again, and once to me.
‘In that dream I thought the eastern sky grew dark and there was
a growing thunder, but in the West a pale light lingered, and out of
it I heard a voice, remote but clear, crying:
Seek for the Sword that was broken:
In Imladris it dwells;
There shall be counsels taken
Stronger than Morgul-spells.
There shall be shown a token
That Doom is near at hand,
For Isildur’s Bane shall waken,
And the Halﬂing forth shall stand.
Of these words we could understand little, and we spoke to our
father, Denethor, Lord of Minas Tirith, wise in the lore of Gondor.
This only would he say, that Imladris was of old the name among
the Elves of a far northern dale, where Elrond the Halfelven dwelt,
greatest of lore-masters. Therefore my brother, seeing how desperate
was our need, was eager to heed the dream and seek for Imladris;
but since the way was full of doubt and danger, I took the journey
upon myself. Loth was my father to give me leave, and long have I
wandered by roads forgotten, seeking the house of Elrond, of which
many had heard, but few knew where it lay.’
‘And here in the house of Elrond more shall be made clear to
you,’ said Aragorn, standing up. He cast his sword upon the table
that stood before Elrond, and the blade was in two pieces. ‘Here is
the Sword that was Broken!’ he said.
‘And who are you, and what have you to do with Minas Tirith?’
asked Boromir, looking in wonder at the lean face of the Ranger and
his weather-stained cloak.
‘He is Aragorn son of Arathorn,’ said Elrond; ‘and he is descended
through many fathers from Isildur Elendil’s son of Minas Ithil. He
is the Chief of the Du´nedain in the North, and few are now left of
that folk.’

‘Then it belongs to you, and not to me at all!’ cried Frodo in
amazement, springing to his feet, as if he expected the Ring to be
demanded at once.
‘It does not belong to either of us,’ said Aragorn; ‘but it has been
ordained that you should hold it for a while.’
‘Bring out the Ring, Frodo!’ said Gandalf solemnly. ‘The time has
come. Hold it up, and then Boromir will understand the remainder
of his riddle.’
There was a hush, and all turned their eyes on Frodo. He was
shaken by a sudden shame and fear; and he felt a great reluctance
to reveal the Ring, and a loathing of its touch. He wished he was far
away. The Ring gleamed and ﬂickered as he held it up before them
in his trembling hand.
‘Behold Isildur’s Bane!’ said Elrond.
Boromir’s eyes glinted as he gazed at the golden thing. ‘The
Halﬂing!’ he muttered. ‘Is then the doom of Minas Tirith come at
last? But why then should we seek a broken sword?’
‘The words were not the doom of Minas Tirith,’ said Aragorn. ‘But
doom and great deeds are indeed at hand. For the Sword that was
Broken is the Sword of Elendil that broke beneath him when he fell.
It has been treasured by his heirs when all other heirlooms were lost;
for it was spoken of old among us that it should be made again when
the Ring, Isildur’s Bane, was found. Now you have seen the sword
that you have sought, what would you ask? Do you wish for the
House of Elendil to return to the Land of Gondor?’
‘I was not sent to beg any boon, but to seek only the meaning of
a riddle,’ answered Boromir proudly. ‘Yet we are hard pressed, and
the Sword of Elendil would be a help beyond our hope – if such a
thing could indeed return out of the shadows of the past.’ He looked
again at Aragorn, and doubt was in his eyes.
Frodo felt Bilbo stir impatiently at his side. Evidently he was
annoyed on his friend’s behalf. Standing suddenly up he burst
out:
All that is gold does not glitter,
Not all those who wander are lost;
The old that is strong does not wither,
Deep roots are not reached by the frost.
From the ashes a ﬁre shall be woken,
A light from the shadows shall spring;
Renewed shall be blade that was broken:
The crownless again shall be king.

‘Not very good perhaps, but to the point – if you need more beyond
the word of Elrond. If that was worth a journey of a hundred and
ten days to hear, you had best listen to it.’ He sat down with a snort.
‘I made that up myself,’ he whispered to Frodo, ‘for the Du´ nadan,
a long time ago when he ﬁrst told me about himself. I almost wish
that my adventures were not over, and that I could go with him when
his day comes.’
Aragorn smiled at him; then he turned to Boromir again. ‘For my
part I forgive your doubt,’ he said. ‘Little do I resemble the ﬁgures
of Elendil and Isildur as they stand carven in their majesty in the
halls of Denethor. I am but the heir of Isildur, not Isildur himself. I
have had a hard life and a long; and the leagues that lie between here
and Gondor are a small part in the count of my journeys. I have
crossed many mountains and many rivers, and trodden many plains,
even into the far countries of Rhuˆn and Harad where the stars are
strange.
‘But my home, such as I have, is in the North. For here the heirs
of Valandil have ever dwelt in long line unbroken from father unto
son for many generations. Our days have darkened, and we have
dwindled; but ever the Sword has passed to a new keeper. And this
I will say to you, Boromir, ere I end. Lonely men are we, Rangers
of the wild, hunters – but hunters ever of the servants of the Enemy;
for they are found in many places, not in Mordor only.
‘If Gondor, Boromir, has been a stalwart tower, we have played
another part. Many evil things there are that your strong walls and
bright swords do not stay. You know little of the lands beyond your
bounds. Peace and freedom, do you say? The North would have
known them little but for us. Fear would have destroyed them. But
when dark things come from the houseless hills, or creep from sunless
woods, they ﬂy from us. What roads would any dare to tread, what
safety would there be in quiet lands, or in the homes of simple men
at night, if the Du´nedain were asleep, or were all gone into the grave?
‘And yet less thanks have we than you. Travellers scowl at us, and
countrymen give us scornful names. ‘‘Strider’’ I am to one fat man
who lives within a day’s march of foes that would freeze his heart,
or lay his little town in ruin, if he were not guarded ceaselessly. Yet
we would not have it otherwise. If simple folk are free from care and
fear, simple they will be, and we must be secret to keep them so.
That has been the task of my kindred, while the years have lengthened
and the grass has grown.
‘But now the world is changing once again. A new hour comes.
Isildur’s Bane is found. Battle is at hand. The Sword shall be reforged.
I will come to Minas Tirith.’
‘Isildur’s Bane is found, you say,’ said Boromir. ‘I have seen a

bright ring in the Halﬂing’s hand; but Isildur perished ere this age
of the world began, they say. How do the Wise know that this ring
is his? And how has it passed down the years, until it is brought
hither by so strange a messenger?’
‘That shall be told,’ said Elrond.
‘But not yet, I beg, Master!’ cried Bilbo. ‘Already the Sun is climb-
ing to noon, and I feel the need of something to strengthen me.’
‘I had not named you,’ said Elrond smiling. ‘But I do so now.
Come! Tell us your tale. And if you have not yet cast your story into
verse, you may tell it in plain words. The briefer, the sooner shall
you be refreshed.’
‘Very well,’ said Bilbo. ‘I will do as you bid. But I will now tell
the true story, and if some here have heard me tell it otherwise’ – he
looked sidelong at Glo´ in – ‘I ask them to forget it and forgive me. I
only wished to claim the treasure as my very own in those days, and
to be rid of the name of thief that was put on me. But perhaps I
understand things a little better now. Anyway, this is what happened.’
To some there Bilbo’s tale was wholly new, and they listened
with amazement while the old hobbit, actually not at all displeased,
recounted his adventure with Gollum, at full length. He did not omit
a single riddle. He would have given also an account of his party and
disappearance from the Shire, if he had been allowed; but Elrond
raised his hand.
‘Well told, my friend,’ he said, ‘but that is enough at this time.
For the moment it sufﬁces to know that the Ring passed to Frodo,
your heir. Let him now speak!’
Then, less willingly than Bilbo, Frodo told of all his dealings with
the Ring from the day that it passed into his keeping. Every step of
his journey from Hobbiton to the Ford of Bruinen was questioned
and considered, and everything that he could recall concerning the
Black Riders was examined. At last he sat down again.
‘Not bad,’ Bilbo said to him. ‘You would have made a good story
of it, if they hadn’t kept on interrupting. I tried to make a few notes,
but we shall have to go over it all again together some time, if I am
to write it up. There are whole chapters of stuff before you ever got
here!’
‘Yes, it made quite a long tale,’ answered Frodo. ‘But the story
still does not seem complete to me. I still want to know a good deal,
especially about Gandalf.’
Galdor of the Havens, who sat nearby, overheard him. ‘You speak
for me also,’ he cried, and turning to Elrond he said: ‘The Wise may
have good reason to believe that the halﬂing’s trove is indeed the

Great Ring of long debate, unlikely though that may seem to those
who know less. But may we not hear the proofs? And I would ask
this also. What of Saruman? He is learned in the lore of the Rings,
yet he is not among us. What is his counsel – if he knows the things
that we have heard?’
‘The questions that you ask, Galdor, are bound together,’ said
Elrond. ‘I had not overlooked them, and they shall be answered. But
these things it is the part of Gandalf to make clear; and I call upon
him last, for it is the place of honour, and in all this matter he has
been the chief.’
‘Some, Galdor,’ said Gandalf, ‘would think the tidings of Glo´ in,
and the pursuit of Frodo, proof enough that the halﬂing’s trove is a
thing of great worth to the Enemy. Yet it is a ring. What then? The
Nine the Nazguˆl keep. The Seven are taken or destroyed.’ At this
Glo´in stirred, but did not speak. ‘The Three we know of. What then
is this one that he desires so much?
‘There is indeed a wide waste of time between the River and the
Mountain, between the loss and the ﬁnding. But the gap in the know-
ledge of the Wise has been ﬁlled at last. Yet too slowly. For the Enemy
has been close behind, closer even than I feared. And well is it that
not until this year, this very summer, as it seems, did he learn the
full truth.
‘Some here will remember that many years ago I myself dared to
pass the doors of the Necromancer in Dol Guldur, and secretly
explored his ways, and found thus that our fears were true: he was
none other than Sauron, our Enemy of old, at length taking shape
and power again. Some, too, will remember also that Saruman dis-
suaded us from open deeds against him, and for long we watched
him only. Yet at last, as his shadow grew, Saruman yielded, and the
Council put forth its strength and drove the evil out of Mirkwood –
and that was in the very year of the ﬁnding of this Ring: a strange
chance, if chance it was.
‘But we were too late, as Elrond foresaw. Sauron also had watched
us, and had long prepared against our stroke, governing Mordor from
afar through Minas Morgul, where his Nine servants dwelt, until all
was ready. Then he gave way before us, but only feigned to ﬂee, and
soon after came to the Dark Tower and openly declared himself.
Then for the last time the Council met; for now we learned that he
was seeking ever more eagerly for the One. We feared then that he
had some news of it that we knew nothing of. But Saruman said nay,
and repeated what he had said to us before: that the One would never
again be found in Middle-earth.
‘ ‘‘At the worst,’’ said he, ‘‘our Enemy knows that we have it not,
and that it still is lost. But what was lost may yet be found, he thinks.

Fear not! His hope will cheat him. Have I not earnestly studied this
matter? Into Anduin the Great it fell; and long ago, while Sauron
slept, it was rolled down the River to the Sea. There let it lie until
the End.’’ ’
Gandalf fell silent, gazing eastward from the porch to the far peaks
of the Misty Mountains, at whose great roots the peril of the world
had so long lain hidden. He sighed.
‘There I was at fault,’ he said. ‘I was lulled by the words of
Saruman the Wise; but I should have sought for the truth sooner,
and our peril would now be less.’
‘We were all at fault,’ said Elrond, ‘and but for your vigilance the
Darkness, maybe, would already be upon us. But say on!’
‘From the ﬁrst my heart misgave me, against all reason that I
knew,’ said Gandalf, ‘and I desired to know how this thing came to
Gollum, and how long he had possessed it. So I set a watch for him,
guessing that he would ere long come forth from his darkness to seek
for his treasure. He came, but he escaped and was not found. And
then alas! I let the matter rest, watching and waiting only, as we have
too often done.
‘Time passed with many cares, until my doubts were awakened
again to sudden fear. Whence came the hobbit’s ring? What, if my
fear was true, should be done with it? Those things I must decide.
But I spoke yet of my dread to none, knowing the peril of an untimely
whisper, if it went astray. In all the long wars with the Dark Tower
treason has ever been our greatest foe.
‘That was seventeen years ago. Soon I became aware that spies of
many sorts, even beasts and birds, were gathered round the Shire,
and my fear grew. I called for the help of the Du´nedain, and their
watch was doubled; and I opened my heart to Aragorn, the heir of
Isildur.’
‘And I,’ said Aragorn, ‘counselled that we should hunt for Gollum,
too late though it may seem. And since it seemed ﬁt that Isildur’s
heir should labour to repair Isildur’s fault, I went with Gandalf on
the long and hopeless search.’
Then Gandalf told how they had explored the whole length of
Wilderland, down even to the Mountains of Shadow and the fences
of Mordor. ‘There we had rumour of him, and we guess that he
dwelt there long in the dark hills; but we never found him, and at
last I despaired. And then in my despair I thought again of a test
that might make the ﬁnding of Gollum unneeded. The ring itself
might tell if it were the One. The memory of words at the Council
came back to me: words of Saruman, half-heeded at the time. I heard
them now clearly in my heart.

‘ ‘‘The Nine, the Seven, and the Three,’’ he said, ‘‘had each their
proper gem. Not so the One. It was round and unadorned, as it were
one of the lesser rings; but its maker set marks upon it that the skilled,
maybe, could still see and read.’’
‘What those marks were he had not said. Who now would know?
The maker. And Saruman? But great though his lore may be, it must
have a source. What hand save Sauron’s ever held this thing, ere it
was lost? The hand of Isildur alone.
‘With that thought, I forsook the chase, and passed swiftly to
Gondor. In former days the members of my order had been well
received there, but Saruman most of all. Often he had been for long
the guest of the Lords of the City. Less welcome did the Lord
Denethor show me then than of old, and grudgingly he permitted
me to search among his hoarded scrolls and books.
‘ ‘‘If indeed you look only, as you say, for records of ancient days,
and the beginnings of the City, read on!’’ he said. ‘‘For to me what
was is less dark than what is to come, and that is my care. But unless
you have more skill even than Saruman, who has studied here long,
you will ﬁnd naught that is not well known to me, who am master
of the lore of this City.’’
‘So said Denethor. And yet there lie in his hoards many records
that few even of the lore-masters now can read, for their scripts and
tongues have become dark to later men. And Boromir, there lies in
Minas Tirith still, unread, I guess, by any save Saruman and myself
since the kings failed, a scroll that Isildur made himself. For Isildur
did not march away straight from the war in Mordor, as some have
told the tale.’
‘Some in the North, maybe,’ Boromir broke in. ‘All know in
Gondor that he went ﬁrst to Minas Anor and dwelt a while with his
nephew Meneldil, instructing him, before he committed to him the
rule of the South Kingdom. In that time he planted there the last
sapling of the White Tree in memory of his brother.’
‘But in that time also he made this scroll,’ said Gandalf; ‘and that
is not remembered in Gondor, it would seem. For this scroll concerns
the Ring, and thus wrote Isildur therein:
The Great Ring shall go now to be an heirloom of the North Kingdom;
but records of it shall be left in Gondor, where also dwell the heirs of Elendil,
lest a time come when the memory of these great matters shall grow dim.
‘And after these words Isildur described the Ring, such as he found it.
It was hot when I ﬁrst took it, hot as a glede, and my hand was
scorched, so that I doubt if ever again I shall be free of the pain of it. Yet

even as I write it is cooled, and it seemeth to shrink, though it loseth neither
its beauty nor its shape. Already the writing upon it, which at ﬁrst was
as clear as red ﬂame, fadeth and is now only barely to be read. It is
fashioned in an elven-script of Eregion, for they have no letters in Mordor
for such subtle work; but the language is unknown to me. I deem it to be
a tongue of the Black Land, since it is foul and uncouth. What evil it
saith I do not know; but I trace here a copy of it, lest it fade beyond recall.
The Ring misseth, maybe, the heat of Sauron’s hand, which was black
and yet burned like ﬁre, and so Gil-galad was destroyed; and maybe were
the gold made hot again, the writing would be refreshed. But for my part
I will risk no hurt to this thing: of all the works of Sauron the only fair.
It is precious to me, though I buy it with great pain.
‘When I read these words, my quest was ended. For the traced
writing was indeed as Isildur guessed, in the tongue of Mordor and
the servants of the Tower. And what was said therein was already
known. For in the day that Sauron ﬁrst put on the One, Celebrimbor,
maker of the Three, was aware of him, and from afar he heard him
speak these words, and so his evil purposes were revealed.
‘At once I took my leave of Denethor, but even as I went north-
wards, messages came to me out of Lo´ rien that Aragorn had passed
that way, and that he had found the creature called Gollum. There-
fore I went ﬁrst to meet him and hear his tale. Into what deadly perils
he had gone alone I dared not guess.’
‘There is little need to tell of them,’ said Aragorn. ‘If a man must
needs walk in sight of the Black Gate, or tread the deadly ﬂowers of
Morgul Vale, then perils he will have. I, too, despaired at last, and
I began my homeward journey. And then, by fortune, I came sud-
denly on what I sought: the marks of soft feet beside a muddy pool.
But now the trail was fresh and swift, and it led not to Mordor but
away. Along the skirts of the Dead Marshes I followed it, and then
I had him. Lurking by a stagnant mere, peering in the water as the
dark eve fell, I caught him, Gollum. He was covered with green slime.
He will never love me, I fear; for he bit me, and I was not gentle.
Nothing more did I ever get from his mouth than the marks of his
teeth. I deemed it the worst part of all my journey, the road back,
watching him day and night, making him walk before me with a
halter on his neck, gagged, until he was tamed by lack of drink and
food, driving him ever towards Mirkwood. I brought him there at
last and gave him to the Elves, for we had agreed that this should be
done; and I was glad to be rid of his company, for he stank. For my
part I hope never to look upon him again; but Gandalf came and
endured long speech with him.’
‘Yes, long and weary,’ said Gandalf, ‘but not without proﬁt. For

one thing, the tale he told of his loss agreed with that which Bilbo
has now told openly for the ﬁrst time; but that mattered little, since
I had already guessed it. But I learned then ﬁrst that Gollum’s ring
came out of the Great River nigh to the Gladden Fields. And I learned
also that he had possessed it long. Many lives of his small kind. The
power of the ring had lengthened his years far beyond their span;
but that power only the Great Rings wield.
‘And if that is not proof enough, Galdor, there is the other test
that I spoke of. Upon this very ring which you have here seen held
aloft, round and unadorned, the letters that Isildur reported may still
be read, if one has the strength of will to set the golden thing in the
ﬁre a while. That I have done, and this I have read:
Ash nazg durbatuluˆk, ash nazg gimbatul, ash nazg thrakatuluˆk
agh burzum-ishi krimpatul.’
The change in the wizard’s voice was astounding. Suddenly it
became menacing, powerful, harsh as stone. A shadow seemed to
pass over the high sun, and the porch for a moment grew dark. All
trembled, and the Elves stopped their ears.
‘Never before has any voice dared to utter words of that tongue
in Imladris, Gandalf the Grey,’ said Elrond, as the shadow passed
and the company breathed once more.
‘And let us hope that none will ever speak it here again,’ answered
Gandalf. ‘Nonetheless I do not ask your pardon, Master Elrond. For
if that tongue is not soon to be heard in every corner of the West,
then let all put doubt aside that this thing is indeed what the Wise
have declared: the treasure of the Enemy, fraught with all his malice;
and in it lies a great part of his strength of old. Out of the Black
Years come the words that the Smiths of Eregion heard, and knew
that they had been betrayed:
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to ﬁnd them, One Ring to
bring them all and in the Darkness bind them.
‘Know also, my friends, that I learned more yet from Gollum. He
was loth to speak and his tale was unclear, but it is beyond all doubt
that he went to Mordor, and there all that he knew was forced from
him. Thus the Enemy knows now that the One is found, that it was
long in the Shire; and since his servants have pursued it almost to
our door, he soon will know, already he may know, even as I speak,
that we have it here.’
*
*
*

All sat silent for a while, until at length Boromir spoke. ‘He is a
small thing, you say, this Gollum? Small, but great in mischief. What
became of him? To what doom did you put him?’
‘He is in prison, but no worse,’ said Aragorn. ‘He had suffered
much. There is no doubt that he was tormented, and the fear of
Sauron lies black on his heart. Still I for one am glad that he is safely
kept by the watchful Elves of Mirkwood. His malice is great and
gives him a strength hardly to be believed in one so lean and withered.
He could work much mischief still, if he were free. And I do not
doubt that he was allowed to leave Mordor on some evil errand.’
‘Alas! alas!’ cried Legolas, and in his fair Elvish face there was
great distress. ‘The tidings that I was sent to bring must now be told.
They are not good, but only here have I learned how evil they may
seem to this company. Sme´agol, who is now called Gollum, has
escaped.’
‘Escaped?’ cried Aragorn. ‘That is ill news indeed. We shall all
rue it bitterly, I fear. How came the folk of Thranduil to fail in their
trust?’
‘Not through lack of watchfulness,’ said Legolas; ‘but perhaps
through over-kindliness. And we fear that the prisoner had aid from
others, and that more is known of our doings than we could wish.
We guarded this creature day and night, at Gandalf ’s bidding, much
though we wearied of the task. But Gandalf bade us hope still for
his cure, and we had not the heart to keep him ever in dungeons
under the earth, where he would fall back into his old black
thoughts.’
‘You were less tender to me,’ said Glo´ in with a ﬂash of his eyes,
as old memories were stirred of his imprisonment in the deep places
of the Elven-king’s halls.
‘Now come!’ said Gandalf. ‘Pray, do not interrupt, my good Glo´ in.
That was a regrettable misunderstanding, long set right. If all the
grievances that stand between Elves and Dwarves are to be brought
up here, we may as well abandon this Council.’
Glo´in rose and bowed, and Legolas continued. ‘In the days of fair
weather we led Gollum through the woods; and there was a high tree
standing alone far from the others which he liked to climb. Often we
let him mount up to the highest branches, until he felt the free wind;
but we set a guard at the tree’s foot. One day he refused to come
down, and the guards had no mind to climb after him: he had learned
the trick of clinging to boughs with his feet as well as with his hands;
so they sat by the tree far into the night.
‘It was that very night of summer, yet moonless and starless, that
Orcs came on us at unawares. We drove them off after some time;
they were many and ﬁerce, but they came from over the mountains,

and were unused to the woods. When the battle was over, we found
that Gollum was gone, and his guards were slain or taken. It then
seemed plain to us that the attack had been made for his rescue, and
that he knew of it beforehand. How that was contrived we cannot
guess; but Gollum is cunning, and the spies of the Enemy are many.
The dark things that were driven out in the year of the Dragon’s fall
have returned in greater numbers, and Mirkwood is again an evil
place, save where our realm is maintained.
‘We have failed to recapture Gollum. We came on his trail among
those of many Orcs, and it plunged deep into the Forest, going south.
But ere long it escaped our skill, and we dared not continue the hunt;
for we were drawing nigh to Dol Guldur, and that is still a very evil
place; we do not go that way.’
‘Well, well, he is gone,’ said Gandalf. ‘We have no time to seek
for him again. He must do what he will. But he may play a part yet
that neither he nor Sauron have foreseen.
‘And now I will answer Galdor’s other questions. What of
Saruman? What are his counsels to us in this need? This tale I must
tell in full, for only Elrond has heard it yet, and that in brief; but it
will bear on all that we must resolve. It is the last chapter in the Tale
of the Ring, so far as it has yet gone.
‘At the end of June I was in the Shire, but a cloud of anxiety was
on my mind, and I rode to the southern borders of the little land;
for I had a foreboding of some danger, still hidden from me but
drawing near. There messages reached me telling me of war and
defeat in Gondor, and when I heard of the Black Shadow a chill
smote my heart. But I found nothing save a few fugitives from the
South; yet it seemed to me that on them sat a fear of which they
would not speak. I turned then east and north and journeyed along
the Greenway; and not far from Bree I came upon a traveller sitting
on a bank beside the road with his grazing horse beside him. It was
Radagast the Brown, who at one time dwelt at Rhosgobel, near the
borders of Mirkwood. He is one of my order, but I had not seen him
for many a year.
‘ ‘‘Gandalf !’’ he cried. ‘‘I was seeking you. But I am a stranger in
these parts. All I knew was that you might be found in a wild region
with the uncouth name of Shire.’’
‘ ‘‘Your information was correct,’’ I said. ‘‘But do not put it that
way, if you meet any of the inhabitants. You are near the borders of
the Shire now. And what do you want with me? It must be pressing.
You were never a traveller, unless driven by great need.’’
‘ ‘‘I have an urgent errand,’’ he said. ‘‘My news is evil.’’ Then he
looked about him, as if the hedges might have ears. ‘‘Nazguˆl,’’ he

whispered. ‘‘The Nine are abroad again. They have crossed the River
secretly and are moving westward. They have taken the guise of riders
in black.’’
‘I knew then what I had dreaded without knowing it.
‘ ‘‘The Enemy must have some great need or purpose,’’ said Rada-
gast; ‘‘but what it is that makes him look to these distant and desolate
parts, I cannot guess.’’
‘ ‘‘What do you mean?’’ said I.
‘ ‘‘I have been told that wherever they go the Riders ask for news
of a land called Shire.’’
‘‘‘The Shire,’’ I said; but my heart sank. For even the Wise might
fear to withstand the Nine, when they are gathered together under
their fell chieftain. A great king and sorcerer he was of old, and now
he wields a deadly fear. ‘‘Who told you, and who sent you?’’ I asked.
‘ ‘‘Saruman the White,’’ answered Radagast. ‘‘And he told me to
say that if you feel the need, he will help; but you must seek his aid
at once, or it will be too late.’’
‘And that message brought me hope. For Saruman the White is
the greatest of my order. Radagast is, of course, a worthy Wizard, a
master of shapes and changes of hue; and he has much lore of herbs
and beasts, and birds are especially his friends. But Saruman has
long studied the arts of the Enemy himself, and thus we have often
been able to forestall him. It was by the devices of Saruman that we
drove him from Dol Guldur. It might be that he had found some
weapons that would drive back the Nine.
‘ ‘‘I will go to Saruman,’’ I said.
‘ ‘‘Then you must go now,’’ said Radagast; ‘‘for I have wasted time
in looking for you, and the days are running short. I was told to ﬁnd
you before Midsummer, and that is now here. Even if you set out
from this spot, you will hardly reach him before the Nine discover
the land that they seek. I myself shall turn back at once.’’ And with
that he mounted and would have ridden straight off.
‘ ‘‘Stay a moment!’’ I said. ‘‘We shall need your help, and the help
of all things that will give it. Send out messages to all the beasts and
birds that are your friends. Tell them to bring news of anything that
bears on this matter to Saruman and Gandalf. Let messages be sent
to Orthanc.’’
‘ ‘‘I will do that,’’ he said, and rode off as if the Nine were after
him.
‘I could not follow him then and there. I had ridden very far
already that day, and I was as weary as my horse; and I needed to
consider matters. I stayed the night in Bree, and decided that I had
no time to return to the Shire. Never did I make a greater mistake!

‘However, I wrote a message to Frodo, and trusted to my friend
the innkeeper to send it to him. I rode away at dawn; and I came at
long last to the dwelling of Saruman. That is far south in Isengard,
in the end of the Misty Mountains, not far from the Gap of Rohan.
And Boromir will tell you that that is a great open vale that lies
between the Misty Mountains and the northmost foothills of Ered
Nimrais, the White Mountains of his home. But Isengard is a circle
of sheer rocks that enclose a valley as with a wall, and in the midst
of that valley is a tower of stone called Orthanc. It was not made by
Saruman, but by the Men of Nu´menor long ago; and it is very tall
and has many secrets; yet it looks not to be a work of craft. It cannot
be reached save by passing the circle of Isengard; and in that circle
there is only one gate.
‘Late one evening I came to the gate, like a great arch in the wall
of rock; and it was strongly guarded. But the keepers of the gate were
on the watch for me and told me that Saruman awaited me. I rode
under the arch, and the gate closed silently behind me, and suddenly
I was afraid, though I knew no reason for it.
‘But I rode to the foot of Orthanc, and came to the stair of
Saruman; and there he met me and led me up to his high chamber.
He wore a ring on his ﬁnger.
‘ ‘‘So you have come, Gandalf,’’ he said to me gravely; but in his
eyes there seemed to be a white light, as if a cold laughter was in his
heart.
‘ ‘‘Yes, I have come,’’ I said. ‘‘I have come for your aid, Saruman
the White.’’ And that title seemed to anger him.
‘ ‘‘Have you indeed, Gandalf the Grey!’’ he scoffed. ‘‘For aid? It
has seldom been heard of that Gandalf the Grey sought for aid, one
so cunning and so wise, wandering about the lands, and concerning
himself in every business, whether it belongs to him or not.’’
‘I looked at him and wondered. ‘‘But if I am not deceived,’’ said
I, ‘‘things are now moving which will require the union of all our
strength.’’
‘ ‘‘That may be so,’’ he said, ‘‘but the thought is late in coming
to you. How long, I wonder, have you concealed from me, the head
of the Council, a matter of greatest import? What brings you now
from your lurking-place in the Shire?’’
‘ ‘‘The Nine have come forth again,’’ I answered. ‘‘They have
crossed the River. So Radagast said to me.’’
‘ ‘‘Radagast the Brown!’’ laughed Saruman, and he no longer con-
cealed his scorn. ‘‘Radagast the Bird-tamer! Radagast the Simple!
Radagast the Fool! Yet he had just the wit to play the part that I set
him. For you have come, and that was all the purpose of my message.
And here you will stay, Gandalf the Grey, and rest from journeys.

For I am Saruman the Wise, Saruman Ring-maker, Saruman of Many
Colours!’’
‘I looked then and saw that his robes, which had seemed white,
were not so, but were woven of all colours, and if he moved they
shimmered and changed hue so that the eye was bewildered.
‘ ‘‘I liked white better,’’ I said.
‘ ‘‘White!’’ he sneered. ‘‘It serves as a beginning. White cloth may
be dyed. The white page can be overwritten; and the white light can
be broken.’’
‘ ‘‘In which case it is no longer white,’’ said I. ‘‘And he that breaks
a thing to ﬁnd out what it is has left the path of wisdom.’’
‘ ‘‘You need not speak to me as to one of the fools that you take
for friends,’’ said he. ‘‘I have not brought you hither to be instructed
by you, but to give you a choice.’’
‘He drew himself up then and began to declaim, as if he were
making a speech long rehearsed. ‘‘The Elder Days are gone. The
Middle Days are passing. The Younger Days are beginning. The
time of the Elves is over, but our time is at hand: the world of Men,
which we must rule. But we must have power, power to order all
things as we will, for that good which only the Wise can see.
‘ ‘‘And listen, Gandalf, my old friend and helper!’’ he said, coming
near and speaking now in a softer voice. ‘‘I said we, for we it may
be, if you will join with me. A new Power is rising. Against it the old
allies and policies will not avail us at all. There is no hope left in
Elves or dying Nu´menor. This then is one choice before you, before
us. We may join with that Power. It would be wise, Gandalf. There
is hope that way. Its victory is at hand; and there will be rich reward
for those that aided it. As the Power grows, its proved friends will
also grow; and the Wise, such as you and I, may with patience come
at last to direct its courses, to control it. We can bide our time, we
can keep our thoughts in our hearts, deploring maybe evils done by
the way, but approving the high and ultimate purpose: Knowledge,
Rule, Order; all the things that we have so far striven in vain to
accomplish, hindered rather than helped by our weak or idle friends.
There need not be, there would not be, any real change in our designs,
only in our means.’’
‘ ‘‘Saruman,’’ I said, ‘‘I have heard speeches of this kind before,
but only in the mouths of emissaries sent from Mordor to deceive
the ignorant. I cannot think that you brought me so far only to weary
my ears.’’
‘He looked at me sidelong, and paused a while considering. ‘‘Well,
I see that this wise course does not commend itself to you,’’ he said.
‘‘Not yet? Not if some better way can be contrived?’’
‘He came and laid his long hand on my arm. ‘‘And why not,

Gandalf ?’’ he whispered. ‘‘Why not? The Ruling Ring? If we could
command that, then the Power would pass to us. That is in truth
why I brought you here. For I have many eyes in my service, and I
believe that you know where this precious thing now lies. Is it not
so? Or why do the Nine ask for the Shire, and what is your business
there?’’ As he said this a lust which he could not conceal shone
suddenly in his eyes.
‘ ‘‘Saruman,’’ I said, standing away from him, ‘‘only one hand at
a time can wield the One, and you know that well, so do not trouble
to say we! But I would not give it, nay, I would not give even news
of it to you, now that I learn your mind. You were head of the
Council, but you have unmasked yourself at last. Well, the choices
are, it seems, to submit to Sauron, or to yourself. I will take neither.
Have you others to offer?’’
‘He was cold now and perilous. ‘‘Yes,’’ he said. ‘‘I did not expect
you to show wisdom, even in your own behalf; but I gave you the
chance of aiding me willingly, and so saving yourself much trouble
and pain. The third choice is to stay here, until the end.’’
‘ ‘‘Until what end?’’
‘ ‘‘Until you reveal to me where the One may be found. I may ﬁnd
means to persuade you. Or until it is found in your despite, and the
Ruler has time to turn to lighter matters: to devise, say, a ﬁtting
reward for the hindrance and insolence of Gandalf the Grey.’’
‘ ‘‘That may not prove to be one of the lighter matters,’’ said I.
He laughed at me, for my words were empty, and he knew it.
‘They took me and they set me alone on the pinnacle of Orthanc,
in the place where Saruman was accustomed to watch the stars.
There is no descent save by a narrow stair of many thousand steps,
and the valley below seems far away. I looked on it and saw that,
whereas it had once been green and fair, it was now ﬁlled with pits
and forges. Wolves and orcs were housed in Isengard, for Saruman
was mustering a great force on his own account, in rivalry of Sauron
and not in his service, yet. Over all his works a dark smoke hung and
wrapped itself about the sides of Orthanc. I stood alone on an island
in the clouds; and I had no chance of escape, and my days were
bitter. I was pierced with cold, and I had but little room in which to
pace to and fro, brooding on the coming of the Riders to the North.
‘That the Nine had indeed arisen I felt assured, apart from the
words of Saruman which might be lies. Long ere I came to Isengard
I had heard tidings by the way that could not be mistaken. Fear was
ever in my heart for my friends in the Shire; but still I had some
hope. I hoped that Frodo had set forth at once, as my letter had
urged, and that he had reached Rivendell before the deadly pursuit

began. And both my fear and my hope proved ill-founded. For my
hope was founded on a fat man in Bree; and my fear was founded
on the cunning of Sauron. But fat men who sell ale have many calls
to answer; and the power of Sauron is still less than fear makes it.
But in the circle of Isengard, trapped and alone, it was not easy to
think that the hunters before whom all have ﬂed or fallen would falter
in the Shire far away.’
‘I saw you!’ cried Frodo. ‘You were walking backwards and for-
wards. The moon shone in your hair.’
Gandalf paused astonished and looked at him. ‘It was only a
dream,’ said Frodo, ‘but it suddenly came back to me. I had quite
forgotten it. It came some time ago; after I left the Shire, I think.’
‘Then it was late in coming,’ said Gandalf, ‘as you will see. I was
in an evil plight. And those who know me will agree that I have
seldom been in such need, and do not bear such misfortune well.
Gandalf the Grey caught like a ﬂy in a spider’s treacherous web! Yet
even the most subtle spiders may leave a weak thread.
‘At ﬁrst I feared, as Saruman no doubt intended, that Radagast
had also fallen. Yet I had caught no hint of anything wrong in his
voice or in his eye at our meeting. If I had, I should never have gone
to Isengard, or I should have gone more warily. So Saruman guessed,
and he had concealed his mind and deceived his messenger. It would
have been useless in any case to try and win over the honest Radagast
to treachery. He sought me in good faith, and so persuaded me.
‘That was the undoing of Saruman’s plot. For Radagast knew no
reason why he should not do as I asked; and he rode away towards
Mirkwood where he had many friends of old. And the Eagles of the
Mountains went far and wide, and they saw many things: the gather-
ing of wolves and the mustering of Orcs; and the Nine Riders going
hither and thither in the lands; and they heard news of the escape of
Gollum. And they sent a messenger to bring these tidings to me.
‘So it was that when summer waned, there came a night of moon,
and Gwaihir the Windlord, swiftest of the Great Eagles, came
unlooked-for to Orthanc; and he found me standing on the pinnacle.
Then I spoke to him and he bore me away, before Saruman was
aware. I was far from Isengard, ere the wolves and orcs issued from
the gate to pursue me.
‘ ‘‘How far can you bear me?’’ I said to Gwaihir.
‘ ‘‘Many leagues,’’ said he, ‘‘but not to the ends of the earth. I was
sent to bear tidings not burdens.’’
‘ ‘‘Then I must have a steed on land,’’ I said, ‘‘and a steed surpass-
ingly swift, for I have never had such need of haste before.’’
‘ ‘‘Then I will bear you to Edoras, where the Lord of Rohan sits
in his halls,’’ he said; ‘‘for that is not very far off.’’ And I was glad,

for in the Riddermark of Rohan the Rohirrim, the Horse-lords, dwell,
and there are no horses like those that are bred in that great vale
between the Misty Mountains and the White.
‘ ‘‘Are the Men of Rohan still to be trusted, do you think?’’ I said
to Gwaihir, for the treason of Saruman had shaken my faith.
‘ ‘‘They pay a tribute of horses,’’ he answered, ‘‘and send many
yearly to Mordor, or so it is said; but they are not yet under the yoke.
But if Saruman has become evil, as you say, then their doom cannot
be long delayed.’’
‘He set me down in the land of Rohan ere dawn; and now I have
lengthened my tale over long. The rest must be more brief. In
Rohan I found evil already at work: the lies of Saruman; and the king
of the land would not listen to my warnings. He bade me take a
horse and be gone; and I chose one much to my liking, but little to
his. I took the best horse in his land, and I have never seen the like
of him.’
‘Then he must be a noble beast indeed,’ said Aragorn; ‘and it
grieves me more than many tidings that might seem worse to learn
that Sauron levies such tribute. It was not so when last I was in that
land.’
‘Nor is it now, I will swear,’ said Boromir. ‘It is a lie that comes
from the Enemy. I know the Men of Rohan, true and valiant, our
allies, dwelling still in the lands that we gave them long ago.’
‘The shadow of Mordor lies on distant lands,’ answered Aragorn.
‘Saruman has fallen under it. Rohan is beset. Who knows what you
will ﬁnd there, if ever you return?’
‘Not this at least,’ said Boromir, ‘that they will buy their lives with
horses. They love their horses next to their kin. And not without
reason, for the horses of the Riddermark come from the ﬁelds of the
North, far from the Shadow, and their race, as that of their masters,
is descended from the free days of old.’
‘True indeed!’ said Gandalf. ‘And there is one among them that
might have been foaled in the morning of the world. The horses of
the Nine cannot vie with him; tireless, swift as the ﬂowing wind.
Shadowfax they called him. By day his coat glistens like silver; and
by night it is like a shade, and he passes unseen. Light is his footfall!
Never before had any man mounted him, but I took him and I tamed
him, and so speedily he bore me that I reached the Shire when Frodo
was on the Barrow-downs, though I set out from Rohan only when
he set out from Hobbiton.
‘But fear grew in me as I rode. Ever as I came north I heard tidings
of the Riders, and though I gained on them day by day, they were
ever before me. They had divided their forces, I learned: some

remained on the eastern borders, not far from the Greenway, and
some invaded the Shire from the south. I came to Hobbiton and
Frodo had gone; but I had words with old Gamgee. Many words
and few to the point. He had much to say about the shortcomings
of the new owners of Bag End.
‘ ‘‘I can’t abide changes,’’ said he, ‘‘not at my time of life, and
least of all changes for the worst.’’ ‘‘Changes for the worst,’’ he
repeated many times.
‘ ‘‘Worst is a bad word,’’ I said to him, ‘‘and I hope you do not
live to see it.’’ But amidst his talk I gathered at last that Frodo had
left Hobbiton less than a week before, and that a black horseman
had come to the Hill the same evening. Then I rode on in fear. I
came to Buckland and found it in uproar, as busy as a hive of ants
that has been stirred with a stick. I came to the house at Crickhollow,
and it was broken open and empty; but on the threshold there lay a
cloak that had been Frodo’s. Then for a while hope left me, and I
did not wait to gather news, or I might have been comforted; but I
rode on the trail of the Riders. It was hard to follow, for it went many
ways, and I was at a loss. But it seemed to me that one or two had
ridden towards Bree; and that way I went, for I thought of words
that might be said to the innkeeper.
‘ ‘‘Butterbur they call him,’’ thought I. ‘‘If this delay was his fault,
I will melt all the butter in him. I will roast the old fool over a slow
ﬁre.’’ He expected no less, and when he saw my face he fell down
ﬂat and began to melt on the spot.’
‘What did you do to him?’ cried Frodo in alarm. ‘He was really
very kind to us and did all that he could.’
Gandalf laughed. ‘Don’t be afraid!’ he said. ‘I did not bite, and I
barked very little. So overjoyed was I by the news that I got out of
him, when he stopped quaking, that I embraced the old fellow. How
it had happened I could not then guess, but I learned that you had
been in Bree the night before, and had gone off that morning with
Strider.
‘ ‘‘Strider!’’ I cried, shouting for joy.
‘ ‘‘Yes, sir, I am afraid so, sir,’’ said Butterbur, mistaking me. ‘‘He
got at them, in spite of all that I could do, and they took up with
him. They behaved very queer all the time they were here: wilful,
you might say.’’
‘ ‘‘Ass! Fool! Thrice worthy and beloved Barliman!’’ said I. ‘‘It’s
the best news I have had since Midsummer; it’s worth a gold piece at
the least. May your beer be laid under an enchantment of surpassing
excellence for seven years!’’ said I. ‘‘Now I can take a night’s rest,
the ﬁrst since I have forgotten when.’’
*
*
*

‘So I stayed there that night, wondering much what had become
of the Riders; for only of two had there yet been any news in Bree,
it seemed. But in the night we heard more. Five at least came from
the west, and they threw down the gates and passed through Bree
like a howling wind; and the Bree-folk are still shivering and ex-
pecting the end of the world. I got up before dawn and went after
them.
‘I do not know, but it seems clear to me that this is what happened.
Their Captain remained in secret away south of Bree, while two rode
ahead through the village, and four more invaded the Shire. But
when these were foiled in Bree and at Crickhollow, they returned to
their Captain with tidings, and so left the Road unguarded for a
while, except by their spies. The Captain then sent some eastward
straight across country, and he himself with the rest rode along the
Road in great wrath.
‘I galloped to Weathertop like a gale, and I reached it before
sundown on my second day from Bree – and they were there before
me. They drew away from me, for they felt the coming of my anger
and they dared not face it while the Sun was in the sky. But they
closed round at night, and I was besieged on the hill-top, in the old
ring of Amon Suˆl. I was hard put to it indeed: such light and ﬂame
cannot have been seen on Weathertop since the war-beacons of old.
‘At sunrise I escaped and ﬂed towards the north. I could not hope
to do more. It was impossible to ﬁnd you, Frodo, in the wilderness,
and it would have been folly to try with all the Nine at my heels. So
I had to trust to Aragorn. But I hoped to draw some of them off,
and yet reach Rivendell ahead of you and send out help. Four Riders
did indeed follow me, but they turned back after a while and made
for the Ford, it seems. That helped a little, for there were only ﬁve,
not nine, when your camp was attacked.
‘I reached here at last by a long hard road, up the Hoarwell and
through the Ettenmoors, and down from the north. It took me nearly
ﬁfteen days from Weathertop, for I could not ride among the rocks
of the troll-fells, and Shadowfax departed. I sent him back to his
master; but a great friendship has grown between us, and if I have
need he will come at my call. But so it was that I came to Rivendell
only two days before the Ring, and news of its peril had already been
brought here – which proved well indeed.
‘And that, Frodo, is the end of my account. May Elrond and the
others forgive the length of it. But such a thing has not happened
before, that Gandalf broke tryst and did not come when he promised.
An account to the Ring-bearer of so strange an event was required,
I think.
‘Well, the Tale is now told, from ﬁrst to last. Here we all are, and

here is the Ring. But we have not yet come any nearer to our purpose.
What shall we do with it?’
There was a silence. At last Elrond spoke again.
‘This is grievous news concerning Saruman,’ he said; ‘for we
trusted him and he is deep in all our counsels. It is perilous to study
too deeply the arts of the Enemy, for good or for ill. But such falls
and betrayals, alas, have happened before. Of the tales that we have
heard this day the tale of Frodo was most strange to me. I have
known few hobbits, save Bilbo here; and it seems to me that he is
perhaps not so alone and singular as I had thought him. The world
has changed much since I last was on the westward roads.
‘The Barrow-wights we know by many names; and of the Old
Forest many tales have been told: all that now remains is but an
outlier of its northern march. Time was when a squirrel could go
from tree to tree from what is now the Shire to Dunland west of
Isengard. In those lands I journeyed once, and many things wild and
strange I knew. But I had forgotten Bombadil, if indeed this is still
the same that walked the woods and hills long ago, and even then
was older than the old. That was not then his name. Iarwain Ben-adar
we called him, oldest and fatherless. But many another name he
has since been given by other folk: Forn by the Dwarves, Orald by
Northern Men, and other names beside. He is a strange creature,
but maybe I should have summoned him to our Council.’
‘He would not have come,’ said Gandalf.
‘Could we not still send messages to him and obtain his help?’
asked Erestor. ‘It seems that he has a power even over the Ring.’
‘No, I should not put it so,’ said Gandalf. ‘Say rather that the
Ring has no power over him. He is his own master. But he cannot
alter the Ring itself, nor break its power over others. And now he is
withdrawn into a little land, within bounds that he has set, though
none can see them, waiting perhaps for a change of days, and he will
not step beyond them.’
‘But within those bounds nothing seems to dismay him,’ said
Erestor. ‘Would he not take the Ring and keep it there, for ever
harmless?’
‘No,’ said Gandalf, ‘not willingly. He might do so, if all the free
folk of the world begged him, but he would not understand the need.
And if he were given the Ring, he would soon forget it, or most likely
throw it away. Such things have no hold on his mind. He would be
a most unsafe guardian; and that alone is answer enough.’
‘But in any case,’ said Glorﬁndel, ‘to send the Ring to him would
only postpone the day of evil. He is far away. We could not now take
it back to him, unguessed, unmarked by any spy. And even if we

could, soon or late the Lord of the Rings would learn of its hiding
place and would bend all his power towards it. Could that power be
deﬁed by Bombadil alone? I think not. I think that in the end, if all
else is conquered, Bombadil will fall, Last as he was First; and then
Night will come.’
‘I know little of Iarwain save the name,’ said Galdor; ‘but Glorﬁn-
del, I think, is right. Power to defy our Enemy is not in him, unless
such power is in the earth itself. And yet we see that Sauron can
torture and destroy the very hills. What power still remains lies with
us, here in Imladris, or with Cı´rdan at the Havens, or in Lo´ rien. But
have they the strength, have we here the strength to withstand the
Enemy, the coming of Sauron at the last, when all else is overthrown?’
‘I have not the strength,’ said Elrond; ‘neither have they.’
‘Then if the Ring cannot be kept from him for ever by strength,’
said Glorﬁndel, ‘two things only remain for us to attempt: to send it
over the Sea, or to destroy it.’
‘But Gandalf has revealed to us that we cannot destroy it by any
craft that we here possess,’ said Elrond. ‘And they who dwell beyond
the Sea would not receive it: for good or ill it belongs to Middle-earth;
it is for us who still dwell here to deal with it.’
‘Then,’ said Glorﬁndel, ‘let us cast it into the deeps, and so make
the lies of Saruman come true. For it is clear now that even at the
Council his feet were already on a crooked path. He knew that the
Ring was not lost for ever, but wished us to think so; for he began
to lust for it for himself. Yet oft in lies truth is hidden: in the Sea it
would be safe.’
‘Not safe for ever,’ said Gandalf. ‘There are many things in the
deep waters; and seas and lands may change. And it is not our part
here to take thought only for a season, or for a few lives of Men, or
for a passing age of the world. We should seek a ﬁnal end of this
menace, even if we do not hope to make one.’
‘And that we shall not ﬁnd on the roads to the Sea,’ said Galdor.
‘If the return to Iarwain be thought too dangerous, then ﬂight to the
Sea is now fraught with gravest peril. My heart tells me that Sauron
will expect us to take the western way, when he learns what has
befallen. He soon will. The Nine have been unhorsed indeed, but
that is but a respite, ere they ﬁnd new steeds and swifter. Only the
waning might of Gondor stands now between him and a march in
power along the coasts into the North; and if he comes, assailing the
White Towers and the Havens, hereafter the Elves may have no
escape from the lengthening shadows of Middle-earth.’
‘Long yet will that march be delayed,’ said Boromir. ‘Gondor
wanes, you say. But Gondor stands, and even the end of its strength
is still very strong.’

‘And yet its vigilance can no longer keep back the Nine,’ said
Galdor. ‘And other roads he may ﬁnd that Gondor does not guard.’
‘Then,’ said Erestor, ‘there are but two courses, as Glorﬁndel
already has declared: to hide the Ring for ever; or to unmake it. But
both are beyond our power. Who will read this riddle for us?’
‘None here can do so,’ said Elrond gravely. ‘At least none can
foretell what will come to pass, if we take this road or that. But it
seems to me now clear which is the road that we must take. The
westward road seems easiest. Therefore it must be shunned. It will
be watched. Too often the Elves have ﬂed that way. Now at this last
we must take a hard road, a road unforeseen. There lies our hope,
if hope it be. To walk into peril – to Mordor. We must send the Ring
to the Fire.’
Silence fell again. Frodo, even in that fair house, looking out upon
a sunlit valley ﬁlled with the noise of clear waters, felt a dead darkness
in his heart. Boromir stirred, and Frodo looked at him. He was
ﬁngering his great horn and frowning. At length he spoke.
‘I do not understand all this,’ he said. ‘Saruman is a traitor, but
did he not have a glimpse of wisdom? Why do you speak ever of
hiding and destroying? Why should we not think that the Great Ring
has come into our hands to serve us in the very hour of need? Wielding
it the Free Lords of the Free may surely defeat the Enemy. That is
what he most fears, I deem.
‘The Men of Gondor are valiant, and they will never submit; but
they may be beaten down. Valour needs ﬁrst strength, and then a
weapon. Let the Ring be your weapon, if it has such power as you
say. Take it and go forth to victory!’
‘Alas, no,’ said Elrond. ‘We cannot use the Ruling Ring. That we
now know too well. It belongs to Sauron and was made by him alone,
and is altogether evil. Its strength, Boromir, is too great for anyone
to wield at will, save only those who have already a great power of
their own. But for them it holds an even deadlier peril. The very
desire of it corrupts the heart. Consider Saruman. If any of the Wise
should with this Ring overthrow the Lord of Mordor, using his own
arts, he would then set himself on Sauron’s throne, and yet another
Dark Lord would appear. And that is another reason why the Ring
should be destroyed: as long as it is in the world it will be a danger
even to the Wise. For nothing is evil in the beginning. Even Sauron
was not so. I fear to take the Ring to hide it. I will not take the Ring
to wield it.’
‘Nor I,’ said Gandalf.
Boromir looked at them doubtfully, but he bowed his head. ‘So
be it,’ he said. ‘Then in Gondor we must trust to such weapons as

we have. And at the least, while the Wise ones guard this Ring, we
will ﬁght on. Mayhap the Sword-that-was-Broken may still stem the
tide – if the hand that wields it has inherited not an heirloom only,
but the sinews of the Kings of Men.’
‘Who can tell?’ said Aragorn. ‘But we will put it to the test one
day.’
‘May the day not be too long delayed,’ said Boromir. ‘For though
I do not ask for aid, we need it. It would comfort us to know that
others fought also with all the means that they have.’
‘Then be comforted,’ said Elrond. ‘For there are other powers
and realms that you know not, and they are hidden from you. Anduin
the Great ﬂows past many shores, ere it comes to Argonath and the
Gates of Gondor.’
‘Still it might be well for all,’ said Glo´ in the Dwarf, ‘if all these
strengths were joined, and the powers of each were used in league.
Other rings there may be, less treacherous, that might be used in our
need. The Seven are lost to us – if Balin has not found the ring of
Thro´r, which was the last; naught has been heard of it since Thro´r
perished in Moria. Indeed I may now reveal that it was partly in hope
to ﬁnd that ring that Balin went away.’
‘Balin will ﬁnd no ring in Moria,’ said Gandalf. ‘Thro´r gave it to
Thra´in his son, but not Thra´in to Thorin. It was taken with torment
from Thra´in in the dungeons of Dol Guldur. I came too late.’
‘Ah, alas!’ cried Glo´ in. ‘When will the day come of our revenge?
But still there are the Three. What of the Three Rings of the Elves?
Very mighty Rings, it is said. Do not the Elf-lords keep them? Yet
they too were made by the Dark Lord long ago. Are they idle? I see
Elf-lords here. Will they not say?’
The Elves returned no answer. ‘Did you not hear me, Glo´ in?’ said
Elrond. ‘The Three were not made by Sauron, nor did he ever touch
them. But of them it is not permitted to speak. So much only in this
hour of doubt I may now say. They are not idle. But they were not
made as weapons of war or conquest: that is not their power. Those
who made them did not desire strength or domination or hoarded
wealth, but understanding, making, and healing, to preserve all things
unstained. These things the Elves of Middle-earth have in some
measure gained, though with sorrow. But all that has been wrought
by those who wield the Three will turn to their undoing, and their
minds and hearts will become revealed to Sauron, if he regains the
One. It would be better if the Three had never been. That is his
purpose.’
‘But what then would happen, if the Ruling Ring were destroyed,
as you counsel?’ asked Glo´in.
‘We know not for certain,’ answered Elrond sadly. ‘Some hope

that the Three Rings, which Sauron has never touched, would then
become free, and their rulers might heal the hurts of the world that
he has wrought. But maybe when the One has gone, the Three will
fail, and many fair things will fade and be forgotten. That is my
belief.’
‘Yet all the Elves are willing to endure this chance,’ said Glorﬁndel,
‘if by it the power of Sauron may be broken, and the fear of his
dominion be taken away for ever.’
‘Thus we return once more to the destroying of the Ring,’ said
Erestor, ‘and yet we come no nearer. What strength have we for the
ﬁnding of the Fire in which it was made? That is the path of despair.
Of folly I would say, if the long wisdom of Elrond did not forbid
me.’
‘Despair, or folly?’ said Gandalf. ‘It is not despair, for despair is
only for those who see the end beyond all doubt. We do not. It is
wisdom to recognize necessity, when all other courses have been
weighed, though as folly it may appear to those who cling to false
hope. Well, let folly be our cloak, a veil before the eyes of the Enemy!
For he is very wise, and weighs all things to a nicety in the scales of
his malice. But the only measure that he knows is desire, desire for
power; and so he judges all hearts. Into his heart the thought will
not enter that any will refuse it, that having the Ring we may seek
to destroy it. If we seek this, we shall put him out of reckoning.’
‘At least for a while,’ said Elrond. ‘The road must be trod, but it
will be very hard. And neither strength nor wisdom will carry us far
upon it. This quest may be attempted by the weak with as much
hope as the strong. Yet such is oft the course of deeds that move the
wheels of the world: small hands do them because they must, while
the eyes of the great are elsewhere.’
‘Very well, very well, Master Elrond!’ said Bilbo suddenly. ‘Say
no more! It is plain enough what you are pointing at. Bilbo the silly
hobbit started this affair, and Bilbo had better ﬁnish it, or himself. I
was very comfortable here, and getting on with my book. If you want
to know, I am just writing an ending for it. I had thought of putting:
and he lived happily ever afterwards to the end of his days. It is a good
ending, and none the worse for having been used before. Now I shall
have to alter that: it does not look like coming true; and anyway there
will evidently have to be several more chapters, if I live to write them.
It is a frightful nuisance. When ought I to start?’
Boromir looked in surprise at Bilbo, but the laughter died on his
lips when he saw that all the others regarded the old hobbit with grave
respect. Only Glo´ in smiled, but his smile came from old memories.
‘Of course, my dear Bilbo,’ said Gandalf. ‘If you had really started

this affair, you might be expected to ﬁnish it. But you know well
enough now that starting is too great a claim for any, and that only
a small part is played in great deeds by any hero. You need not bow!
Though the word was meant, and we do not doubt that under jest
you are making a valiant offer. But one beyond your strength, Bilbo.
You cannot take this thing back. It has passed on. If you need my
advice any longer, I should say that your part is ended, unless as a
recorder. Finish your book, and leave the ending unaltered! There
is still hope for it. But get ready to write a sequel, when they come
back.’
Bilbo laughed. ‘I have never known you give me pleasant advice
before,’ he said. ‘As all your unpleasant advice has been good, I
wonder if this advice is not bad. Still, I don’t suppose I have the
strength or luck left to deal with the Ring. It has grown, and I have
not. But tell me: what do you mean by they?’
‘The messengers who are sent with the Ring.’
‘Exactly! And who are they to be? That seems to me what this
Council has to decide, and all that it has to decide. Elves may thrive
on speech alone, and Dwarves endure great weariness; but I am only
an old hobbit, and I miss my meal at noon. Can’t we think of some
names now? Or put it off till after dinner?’
No one answered. The noon-bell rang. Still no one spoke. Frodo
glanced at all the faces, but they were not turned to him. All the
Council sat with downcast eyes, as if in deep thought. A great dread
fell on him, as if he was awaiting the pronouncement of some doom
that he had long foreseen and vainly hoped might after all never be
spoken. An overwhelming longing to rest and remain at peace by
Bilbo’s side in Rivendell ﬁlled all his heart. At last with an effort he
spoke, and wondered to hear his own words, as if some other will
was using his small voice.
‘I will take the Ring,’ he said, ‘though I do not know the way.’
Elrond raised his eyes and looked at him, and Frodo felt his heart
pierced by the sudden keenness of the glance. ‘If I understand aright
all that I have heard,’ he said, ‘I think that this task is appointed for
you, Frodo; and that if you do not ﬁnd a way, no one will. This is
the hour of the Shire-folk, when they arise from their quiet ﬁelds to
shake the towers and counsels of the Great. Who of all the Wise
could have foreseen it? Or, if they are wise, why should they expect
to know it, until the hour has struck?
‘But it is a heavy burden. So heavy that none could lay it on
another. I do not lay it on you. But if you take it freely, I will say
that your choice is right; and though all the mighty Elf-friends of old,

Hador, and Hu´rin, and Tu´rin, and Beren himself were assembled
together, your seat should be among them.’
‘But you won’t send him off alone surely, Master?’ cried Sam,
unable to contain himself any longer, and jumping up from the corner
where he had been quietly sitting on the ﬂoor.
‘No indeed!’ said Elrond, turning towards him with a smile. ‘You
at least shall go with him. It is hardly possible to separate you from
him, even when he is summoned to a secret council and you are not.’
Sam sat down, blushing and muttering. ‘A nice pickle we have
landed ourselves in, Mr. Frodo!’ he said, shaking his head.

Chapter 3
T H E  R I N G  G O E S  S O U T H
Later that day the hobbits held a meeting of their own in Bilbo’s
room. Merry and Pippin were indignant when they heard that Sam
had crept into the Council, and had been chosen as Frodo’s com-
panion.
‘It’s most unfair,’ said Pippin. ‘Instead of throwing him out, and
clapping him in chains, Elrond goes and rewards him for his cheek!’
‘Rewards!’ said Frodo. ‘I can’t imagine a more severe punishment.
You are not thinking what you are saying: condemned to go on this
hopeless journey, a reward? Yesterday I dreamed that my task was
done, and I could rest here, a long while, perhaps for good.’
‘I don’t wonder,’ said Merry, ‘and I wish you could. But we are
envying Sam, not you. If you have to go, then it will be a punishment
for any of us to be left behind, even in Rivendell. We have come a
long way with you and been through some stiff times. We want to
go on.’
‘That’s what I meant,’ said Pippin. ‘We hobbits ought to stick
together, and we will. I shall go, unless they chain me up. There
must be someone with intelligence in the party.’
‘Then you certainly will not be chosen, Peregrin Took!’ said
Gandalf, looking in through the window, which was near the ground.
‘But you are all worrying yourselves unnecessarily. Nothing is decided
yet.’
‘Nothing decided!’ cried Pippin. ‘Then what were you all doing?
You were shut up for hours.’
‘Talking,’ said Bilbo. ‘There was a deal of talk, and everyone had
an eye-opener. Even old Gandalf. I think Legolas’s bit of news about
Gollum caught even him on the hop, though he passed it off.’
‘You were wrong,’ said Gandalf. ‘You were inattentive. I had
already heard of it from Gwaihir. If you want to know, the only real
eye-openers, as you put it, were you and Frodo; and I was the only
one that was not surprised.’
‘Well, anyway,’ said Bilbo, ‘nothing was decided beyond choosing
poor Frodo and Sam. I was afraid all the time that it might come to
that, if I was let off. But if you ask me, Elrond will send out a fair
number, when the reports come in. Have they started yet, Gandalf ?’
‘Yes,’ said the wizard. ‘Some of the scouts have been sent out
already. More will go tomorrow. Elrond is sending Elves, and they
will get in touch with the Rangers, and maybe with Thranduil’s folk

in Mirkwood. And Aragorn has gone with Elrond’s sons. We shall
have to scour the lands all round for many long leagues before any
move is made. So cheer up, Frodo! You will probably make quite a
long stay here.’
‘Ah!’ said Sam gloomily. ‘We’ll just wait long enough for winter
to come.’
‘That can’t be helped,’ said Bilbo. ‘It’s your fault partly, Frodo my
lad: insisting on waiting for my birthday. A funny way of honouring it,
I can’t help thinking. Not the day I should have chosen for letting
the S.-B.s into Bag End. But there it is: you can’t wait now till spring;
and you can’t go till the reports come back.
When winter ﬁrst begins to bite
and stones crack in the frosty night,
when pools are black and trees are bare,
’tis evil in the Wild to fare.
But that I am afraid will be just your luck.’
‘I am afraid it will,’ said Gandalf. ‘We can’t start until we have
found out about the Riders.’
‘I thought they were all destroyed in the ﬂood,’ said Merry.
‘You cannot destroy Ringwraiths like that,’ said Gandalf. ‘The
power of their master is in them, and they stand or fall by him. We
hope that they were all unhorsed and unmasked, and so made for a
while less dangerous; but we must ﬁnd out for certain. In the mean-
time you should try and forget your troubles, Frodo. I do not know
if I can do anything to help you; but I will whisper this in your ears.
Someone said that intelligence would be needed in the party. He was
right. I think I shall come with you.’
So great was Frodo’s delight at this announcement that Gandalf
left the window-sill, where he had been sitting, and took off his hat
and bowed. ‘I only said I think I shall come. Do not count on anything
yet. In this matter Elrond will have much to say, and your friend the
Strider. Which reminds me, I want to see Elrond. I must be off.’
‘How long do you think I shall have here?’ said Frodo to Bilbo
when Gandalf had gone.
‘Oh, I don’t know. I can’t count days in Rivendell,’ said Bilbo.
‘But quite long, I should think. We can have many a good talk. What
about helping me with my book, and making a start on the next?
Have you thought of an ending?’
‘Yes, several, and all are dark and unpleasant,’ said Frodo.
‘Oh, that won’t do!’ said Bilbo. ‘Books ought to have good endings.
How would this do: and they all settled down and lived together happily
ever after?’

‘It will do well, if it ever comes to that,’ said Frodo.
‘Ah!’ said Sam. ‘And where will they live? That’s what I often
wonder.’
For a while the hobbits continued to talk and think of the past
journey and of the perils that lay ahead; but such was the virtue of
the land of Rivendell that soon all fear and anxiety was lifted from
their minds. The future, good or ill, was not forgotten, but ceased
to have any power over the present. Health and hope grew strong in
them, and they were content with each good day as it came, taking
pleasure in every meal, and in every word and song.
So the days slipped away, as each morning dawned bright and
fair, and each evening followed cool and clear. But autumn was
waning fast; slowly the golden light faded to pale silver, and the
lingering leaves fell from the naked trees. A wind began to blow chill
from the Misty Mountains to the east. The Hunter’s Moon waxed
round in the night sky, and put to ﬂight all the lesser stars. But low
in the South one star shone red. Every night, as the Moon waned
again, it shone brighter and brighter. Frodo could see it from his
window, deep in the heavens, burning like a watchful eye that glared
above the trees on the brink of the valley.
The hobbits had been nearly two months in the house of Elrond,
and November had gone by with the last shreds of autumn, and
December was passing, when the scouts began to return. Some had
gone north beyond the springs of the Hoarwell into the Ettenmoors;
and others had gone west, and with the help of Aragorn and the
Rangers had searched the lands far down the Greyﬂood, as far as
Tharbad, where the old North Road crossed the river by a ruined
town. Many had gone east and south; and some of these had crossed
the Mountains and entered Mirkwood, while others had climbed the
pass at the sources of the Gladden River, and had come down into
Wilderland and over the Gladden Fields and so at length had reached
the old home of Radagast at Rhosgobel. Radagast was not there; and
they had returned over the high pass that was called the Redhorn
Gate. The sons of Elrond, Elladan and Elrohir, were the last to
return; they had made a great journey, passing down the Silverlode
into a strange country, but of their errand they would not speak to
any save to Elrond.
In no region had the messengers discovered any signs or tidings
of the Riders or other servants of the Enemy. Even from the Eagles
of the Misty Mountains they had learned no fresh news. Nothing
had been seen or heard of Gollum; but the wild wolves were still
gathering, and were hunting again far up the Great River. Three of

the black horses had been found at once drowned in the ﬂooded
Ford. On the rocks of the rapids below it searchers discovered the
bodies of ﬁve more, and also a long black cloak, slashed and tattered.
Of the Black Riders no other trace was to be seen, and nowhere was
their presence to be felt. It seemed that they had vanished from the
North.
‘Eight out of the Nine are accounted for at least,’ said Gandalf.
‘It is rash to be too sure, yet I think that we may hope now that the
Ringwraiths were scattered, and have been obliged to return as best
they could to their Master in Mordor, empty and shapeless.
‘If that is so, it will be some time before they can begin the hunt
again. Of course the Enemy has other servants, but they will have to
journey all the way to the borders of Rivendell before they can pick
up our trail. And if we are careful that will be hard to ﬁnd. But we
must delay no longer.’
Elrond summoned the hobbits to him. He looked gravely at Frodo.
‘The time has come,’ he said. ‘If the Ring is to set out, it must go
soon. But those who go with it must not count on their errand being
aided by war or force. They must pass into the domain of the Enemy
far from aid. Do you still hold to your word, Frodo, that you will be
the Ring-bearer?’
‘I do,’ said Frodo. ‘I will go with Sam.’
‘Then I cannot help you much, not even with counsel,’ said
Elrond. ‘I can foresee very little of your road; and how your task is
to be achieved I do not know. The Shadow has crept now to the feet
of the Mountains, and draws nigh even to the borders of the Grey-
ﬂood; and under the Shadow all is dark to me. You will meet many
foes, some open, and some disguised; and you may ﬁnd friends upon
your way when you least look for it. I will send out messages, such
as I can contrive, to those whom I know in the wide world; but so
perilous are the lands now become that some may well miscarry, or
come no quicker than you yourself.
‘And I will choose you companions to go with you, as far as
they will or fortune allows. The number must be few, since your
hope is in speed and secrecy. Had I a host of Elves in armour of
the Elder Days, it would avail little, save to arouse the power of
Mordor.
‘The Company of the Ring shall be Nine; and the Nine Walkers
shall be set against the Nine Riders that are evil. With you and your
faithful servant, Gandalf will go; for this shall be his great task, and
maybe the end of his labours.
‘For the rest, they shall represent the other Free Peoples of the
World: Elves, Dwarves, and Men. Legolas shall be for the Elves; and

Gimli son of Glo´ in for the Dwarves. They are willing to go at least
to the passes of the Mountains, and maybe beyond. For men you
shall have Aragorn son of Arathorn, for the Ring of Isildur concerns
him closely.’
‘Strider!’ cried Frodo.
‘Yes,’ he said with a smile. ‘I ask leave once again to be your
companion, Frodo.’
‘I would have begged you to come,’ said Frodo, ‘only I thought
you were going to Minas Tirith with Boromir.’
‘I am,’ said Aragorn. ‘And the Sword-that-was-Broken shall be
re-forged ere I set out to war. But your road and our road lie together
for many hundreds of miles. Therefore Boromir will also be in the
Company. He is a valiant man.’
‘There remain two more to be found,’ said Elrond. ‘These I will
consider. Of my household I may ﬁnd some that it seems good to
me to send.’
‘But that will leave no place for us!’ cried Pippin in dismay. ‘We
don’t want to be left behind. We want to go with Frodo.’
‘That is because you do not understand and cannot imagine what
lies ahead,’ said Elrond.
‘Neither does Frodo,’ said Gandalf, unexpectedly supporting
Pippin. ‘Nor do any of us see clearly. It is true that if these hobbits
understood the danger, they would not dare to go. But they would
still wish to go, or wish that they dared, and be shamed and un-
happy. I think, Elrond, that in this matter it would be well to trust
rather to their friendship than to great wisdom. Even if you chose
for us an Elf-lord, such as Glorﬁndel, he could not storm the
Dark Tower, nor open the road to the Fire by the power that is in
him.’
‘You speak gravely,’ said Elrond, ‘but I am in doubt. The Shire,
I forebode, is not free now from peril; and these two I had thought
to send back there as messengers, to do what they could, according
to the fashion of their country, to warn the people of their danger.
In any case, I judge that the younger of these two, Peregrin Took,
should remain. My heart is against his going.’
‘Then, Master Elrond, you will have to lock me in prison, or send
me home tied in a sack,’ said Pippin. ‘For otherwise I shall follow
the Company.’
‘Let it be so then. You shall go,’ said Elrond, and he sighed. ‘Now
the tale of Nine is ﬁlled. In seven days the Company must depart.’
The Sword of Elendil was forged anew by Elvish smiths, and on
its blade was traced a device of seven stars set between the crescent
Moon and the rayed Sun, and about them was written many runes;

for Aragorn son of Arathorn was going to war upon the marches of
Mordor. Very bright was that sword when it was made whole again;
the light of the sun shone redly in it, and the light of the moon shone
cold, and its edge was hard and keen. And Aragorn gave it a new
name and called it Andu´ril, Flame of the West.
Aragorn and Gandalf walked together or sat speaking of their road
and the perils they would meet; and they pondered the storied and
ﬁgured maps and books of lore that were in the house of Elrond.
Sometimes Frodo was with them; but he was content to lean on their
guidance, and he spent as much time as he could with Bilbo.
In those last days the hobbits sat together in the evening in the
Hall of Fire, and there among many tales they heard told in full the
lay of Beren and Lu´thien and the winning of the Great Jewel; but in
the day, while Merry and Pippin were out and about, Frodo and
Sam were to be found with Bilbo in his own small room. Then
Bilbo would read passages from his book (which still seemed very
incomplete), or scraps of his verses, or would take notes of Frodo’s
adventures.
On the morning of the last day Frodo was alone with Bilbo, and
the old hobbit pulled out from under his bed a wooden box. He lifted
the lid and fumbled inside.
‘Here is your sword,’ he said. ‘But it was broken, you know. I
took it to keep it safe but I’ve forgotten to ask if the smiths could
mend it. No time now. So I thought, perhaps, you would care to
have this, don’t you know?’
He took from the box a small sword in an old shabby leathern
scabbard. Then he drew it, and its polished and well-tended blade
glittered suddenly, cold and bright. ‘This is Sting,’ he said, and thrust
it with little effort deep into a wooden beam. ‘Take it, if you like.
I shan’t want it again, I expect.’
Frodo accepted it gratefully.
‘Also there is this!’ said Bilbo, bringing out a parcel which seemed
to be rather heavy for its size. He unwound several folds of old cloth,
and held up a small shirt of mail. It was close-woven of many rings,
as supple almost as linen, cold as ice, and harder than steel. It shone
like moonlit silver, and was studded with white gems. With it was a
belt of pearl and crystal.
‘It’s a pretty thing, isn’t it?’ said Bilbo, moving it in the light. ‘And
useful. It is my dwarf-mail that Thorin gave me. I got it back from
Michel Delving before I started, and packed it with my luggage. I
brought all the mementoes of my Journey away with me, except the
Ring. But I did not expect to use this, and I don’t need it now, except
to look at sometimes. You hardly feel any weight when you put
it on.’

‘I should look – well, I don’t think I should look right in it,’ said
Frodo.
‘Just what I said myself,’ said Bilbo. ‘But never mind about looks.
You can wear it under your outer clothes. Come on! You must share
this secret with me. Don’t tell anybody else! But I should feel happier
if I knew you were wearing it. I have a fancy it would turn even the
knives of the Black Riders,’ he ended in a low voice.
‘Very well, I will take it,’ said Frodo. Bilbo put it on him, and
fastened Sting upon the glittering belt; and then Frodo put over the
top his old weather-stained breeches, tunic, and jacket.
‘Just a plain hobbit you look,’ said Bilbo. ‘But there is more about
you now than appears on the surface. Good luck to you!’ He turned
away and looked out of the window, trying to hum a tune.
‘I cannot thank you as I should, Bilbo, for this, and for all your
past kindnesses,’ said Frodo.
‘Don’t try!’ said the old hobbit, turning round and slapping him
on the back. ‘Ow!’ he cried. ‘You are too hard now to slap! But there
you are: Hobbits must stick together, and especially Bagginses. All I
ask in return is: take as much care of yourself as you can, and bring
back all the news you can, and any old songs and tales you can come
by. I’ll do my best to ﬁnish my book before you return. I should like
to write the second book, if I am spared.’ He broke off and turned
to the window again, singing softly.
I sit beside the ﬁre and think
of all that I have seen,
of meadow-ﬂowers and butterﬂies
in summers that have been;
Of yellow leaves and gossamer
in autumns that there were,
with morning mist and silver sun
and wind upon my hair.
I sit beside the ﬁre and think
of how the world will be
when winter comes without a spring
that I shall ever see.
For still there are so many things
that I have never seen:
in every wood in every spring
there is a different green.

I sit beside the ﬁre and think
of people long ago,
and people who will see a world
that I shall never know.
But all the while I sit and think
of times there were before,
I listen for returning feet
and voices at the door.
It was a cold grey day near the end of December. The East Wind
was streaming through the bare branches of the trees, and seething
in the dark pines on the hills. Ragged clouds were hurrying overhead,
dark and low. As the cheerless shadows of the early evening began
to fall the Company made ready to set out. They were to start at
dusk, for Elrond counselled them to journey under cover of night as
often as they could, until they were far from Rivendell.
‘You should fear the many eyes of the servants of Sauron,’ he said.
‘I do not doubt that news of the discomﬁture of the Riders has already
reached him, and he will be ﬁlled with wrath. Soon now his spies on
foot and wing will be abroad in the northern lands. Even of the sky
above you must beware as you go on your way.’
The Company took little gear of war, for their hope was in secrecy
not in battle. Aragorn had Andu´ril but no other weapon, and he went
forth clad only in rusty green and brown, as a Ranger of the wilder-
ness. Boromir had a long sword, in fashion like Andu´ ril but of less
lineage, and he bore also a shield and his war-horn.
‘Loud and clear it sounds in the valleys of the hills,’ he said, ‘and
then let all the foes of Gondor ﬂee!’ Putting it to his lips he blew a
blast, and the echoes leapt from rock to rock, and all that heard that
voice in Rivendell sprang to their feet.
‘Slow should you be to wind that horn again, Boromir,’ said
Elrond, ‘until you stand once more on the borders of your land, and
dire need is on you.’
‘Maybe,’ said Boromir. ‘But always I have let my horn cry at
setting forth, and though thereafter we may walk in the shadows, I
will not go forth as a thief in the night.’
Gimli the dwarf alone wore openly a short shirt of steel-rings, for
dwarves make light of burdens; and in his belt was a broad-bladed
axe. Legolas had a bow and a quiver, and at his belt a long white
knife. The younger hobbits wore the swords that they had taken from
the barrow; but Frodo took only Sting; and his mail-coat, as Bilbo
wished, remained hidden. Gandalf bore his staff, but girt at his side

was the elven-sword Glamdring, the mate of Orcrist that lay now
upon the breast of Thorin under the Lonely Mountain.
All were well furnished by Elrond with thick warm clothes, and
they had jackets and cloaks lined with fur. Spare food and clothes
and blankets and other needs were laden on a pony, none other than
the poor beast that they had brought from Bree.
The stay in Rivendell had worked a great wonder of change on
him: he was glossy and seemed to have the vigour of youth. It was
Sam who had insisted on choosing him, declaring that Bill (as he
called him) would pine, if he did not come.
‘That animal can nearly talk,’ he said, ‘and would talk, if he stayed
here much longer. He gave me a look as plain as Mr. Pippin could
speak it: if you don’t let me go with you, Sam, I’ll follow on my
own.’ So Bill was going as the beast of burden, yet he was the only
member of the Company that did not seem depressed.
Their farewells had been said in the great hall by the ﬁre, and they
were only waiting now for Gandalf, who had not yet come out of the
house. A gleam of ﬁrelight came from the open doors, and soft lights
were glowing in many windows. Bilbo huddled in a cloak stood silent
on the doorstep beside Frodo. Aragorn sat with his head bowed to
his knees; only Elrond knew fully what this hour meant to him. The
others could be seen as grey shapes in the darkness.
Sam was standing by the pony, sucking his teeth, and staring
moodily into the gloom where the river roared stonily below; his
desire for adventure was at its lowest ebb.
‘Bill, my lad,’ he said, ‘you oughtn’t to have took up with us. You
could have stayed here and et the best hay till the new grass comes.’
Bill swished his tail and said nothing.
Sam eased the pack on his shoulders, and went over anxiously in
his mind all the things that he had stowed in it, wondering if he had
forgotten anything: his chief treasure, his cooking gear; and the little
box of salt that he always carried and reﬁlled when he could; a good
supply of pipe-weed (but not near enough, I’ll warrant); ﬂint and
tinder; woollen hose; linen; various small belongings of his master’s
that Frodo had forgotten and Sam had stowed to bring them out in
triumph when they were called for. He went through them all.
‘Rope!’ he muttered. ‘No rope! And only last night you said to
yourself: ‘‘Sam, what about a bit of rope? You’ll want it, if you haven’t
got it.’’ Well, I’ll want it. I can’t get it now.’
At that moment Elrond came out with Gandalf, and he called the
Company to him. ‘This is my last word,’ he said in a low voice. ‘The
Ring-bearer is setting out on the Quest of Mount Doom. On him

alone is any charge laid: neither to cast away the Ring, nor to deliver
it to any servant of the Enemy nor indeed to let any handle it, save
members of the Company and the Council, and only then in gravest
need. The others go with him as free companions, to help him on
his way. You may tarry, or come back, or turn aside into other paths,
as chance allows. The further you go, the less easy will it be to
withdraw; yet no oath or bond is laid on you to go further than you
will. For you do not yet know the strength of your hearts, and you
cannot foresee what each may meet upon the road.’
‘Faithless is he that says farewell when the road darkens,’ said
Gimli.
‘Maybe,’ said Elrond, ‘but let him not vow to walk in the dark,
who has not seen the nightfall.’
‘Yet sworn word may strengthen quaking heart,’ said Gimli.
‘Or break it,’ said Elrond. ‘Look not too far ahead! But go now
with good hearts! Farewell, and may the blessing of Elves and Men
and all Free Folk go with you. May the stars shine upon your faces!’
‘Good ... good luck!’ cried Bilbo, stuttering with the cold. ‘I don’t
suppose you will be able to keep a diary, Frodo my lad, but I shall
expect a full account when you get back. And don’t be too long!
Farewell!’
Many others of Elrond’s household stood in the shadows and
watched them go, bidding them farewell with soft voices. There was
no laughter, and no song or music. At last they turned away and
faded silently into the dusk.
They crossed the bridge and wound slowly up the long steep paths
that led out of the cloven vale of Rivendell; and they came at length
to the high moor where the wind hissed through the heather. Then
with one glance at the Last Homely House twinkling below them
they strode away far into the night.
At the Ford of Bruinen they left the Road and turning southwards
went on by narrow paths among the folded lands. Their purpose was
to hold this course west of the Mountains for many miles and days.
The country was much rougher and more barren than in the green
vale of the Great River in Wilderland on the other side of the range,
and their going would be slow; but they hoped in this way to escape
the notice of unfriendly eyes. The spies of Sauron had hitherto seldom
been seen in this empty country, and the paths were little known
except to the people of Rivendell.
Gandalf walked in front, and with him went Aragorn, who knew
this land even in the dark. The others were in ﬁle behind, and Legolas
whose eyes were keen was the rearguard. The ﬁrst part of their journey

was hard and dreary, and Frodo remembered little of it, save the
wind. For many sunless days an icy blast came from the Mountains
in the east, and no garment seemed able to keep out its searching
ﬁngers. Though the Company was well clad, they seldom felt warm,
either moving or at rest. They slept uneasily during the middle of
the day, in some hollow of the land, or hidden under the tangled
thorn-bushes that grew in thickets in many places. In the late after-
noon they were roused by the watch, and took their chief meal: cold
and cheerless as a rule, for they could seldom risk the lighting of a
ﬁre. In the evening they went on again, always as nearly southward
as they could ﬁnd a way.
At ﬁrst it seemed to the hobbits that although they walked and
stumbled until they were weary, they were creeping forward like
snails, and getting nowhere. Each day the land looked much the same
as it had the day before. Yet steadily the mountains were drawing
nearer. South of Rivendell they rose ever higher, and bent westwards;
and about the feet of the main range there was tumbled an ever wider
land of bleak hills, and deep valleys ﬁlled with turbulent waters. Paths
were few and winding, and led them often only to the edge of some
sheer fall, or down into treacherous swamps.
They had been a fortnight on the way when the weather changed.
The wind suddenly fell and then veered round to the south. The
swift-ﬂowing clouds lifted and melted away, and the sun came out,
pale and bright. There came a cold clear dawn at the end of a long
stumbling night-march. The travellers reached a low ridge crowned
with ancient holly-trees whose grey-green trunks seemed to have been
built out of the very stone of the hills. Their dark leaves shone and
their berries glowed red in the light of the rising sun.
Away in the south Frodo could see the dim shapes of lofty moun-
tains that seemed now to stand across the path that the Company
was taking. At the left of this high range rose three peaks; the tallest
and nearest stood up like a tooth tipped with snow; its great, bare,
northern precipice was still largely in the shadow, but where the
sunlight slanted upon it, it glowed red.
Gandalf stood at Frodo’s side and looked out under his hand. ‘We
have done well,’ he said. ‘We have reached the borders of the country
that Men call Hollin; many Elves lived here in happier days, when
Eregion was its name. Five-and-forty leagues as the crow ﬂies we
have come, though many long miles further our feet have walked.
The land and the weather will be milder now, but perhaps all the
more dangerous.’
‘Dangerous or not, a real sunrise is mighty welcome,’ said Frodo,
throwing back his hood and letting the morning light fall on his face.

‘But the mountains are ahead of us,’ said Pippin. ‘We must have
turned eastwards in the night.’
‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘But you see further ahead in the clear light.
Beyond those peaks the range bends round south-west. There are
many maps in Elrond’s house, but I suppose you never thought to
look at them?’
‘Yes I did, sometimes,’ said Pippin, ‘but I don’t remember them.
Frodo has a better head for that sort of thing.’
‘I need no map,’ said Gimli, who had come up with Legolas, and
was gazing out before him with a strange light in his deep eyes. ‘There
is the land where our fathers worked of old, and we have wrought
the image of those mountains into many works of metal and of stone,
and into many songs and tales. They stand tall in our dreams: Baraz,
Zirak, Shathuˆr.
‘Only once before have I seen them from afar in waking life, but
I know them and their names, for under them lies Khazad-duˆ m, the
Dwarrowdelf, that is now called the Black Pit, Moria in the Elvish
tongue. Yonder stands Barazinbar, the Redhorn, cruel Caradhras;
and beyond him are Silvertine and Cloudyhead: Celebdil the White,
and Fanuidhol the Grey, that we call Zirakzigil and Bundushathuˆr.
‘There the Misty Mountains divide, and between their arms lies
the deep-shadowed valley which we cannot forget: Azanulbizar, the
Dimrill Dale, which the Elves call Nanduhirion.’
‘It is for the Dimrill Dale that we are making,’ said Gandalf. ‘If
we climb the pass that is called the Redhorn Gate, under the far side
of Caradhras, we shall come down by the Dimrill Stair into the deep
vale of the Dwarves. There lies the Mirrormere, and there the River
Silverlode rises in its icy springs.’
‘Dark is the water of Kheled-zaˆram,’ said Gimli, ‘and cold are the
springs of Kibil-naˆla. My heart trembles at the thought that I may
see them soon.’
‘May you have joy of the sight, my good dwarf !’ said Gandalf.
‘But whatever you may do, we at least cannot stay in that valley. We
must go down the Silverlode into the secret woods, and so to the
Great River, and then——’
He paused.
‘Yes, and where then?’ asked Merry.
‘To the end of the journey – in the end,’ said Gandalf. ‘We cannot
look too far ahead. Let us be glad that the ﬁrst stage is safely over.
I think we will rest here, not only today but tonight as well. There
is a wholesome air about Hollin. Much evil must befall a country
before it wholly forgets the Elves, if once they dwelt there.’
‘That is true,’ said Legolas. ‘But the Elves of this land were of a
race strange to us of the silvan folk, and the trees and the grass do

not now remember them. Only I hear the stones lament them: deep
they delved us, fair they wrought us, high they builded us; but they are
gone. They are gone. They sought the Havens long ago.’
That morning they lit a ﬁre in a deep hollow shrouded by great
bushes of holly, and their supper-breakfast was merrier than it had
been since they set out. They did not hurry to bed afterwards, for
they expected to have all the night to sleep in, and they did not mean
to go on again until the evening of the next day. Only Aragorn was
silent and restless. After a while he left the Company and wandered
on to the ridge; there he stood in the shadow of a tree, looking out
southwards and westwards, with his head posed as if he was listening.
Then he returned to the brink of the dell and looked down at the
others laughing and talking.
‘What is the matter, Strider?’ Merry called up. ‘What are you
looking for? Do you miss the East Wind?’
‘No indeed,’ he answered. ‘But I miss something. I have been in
the country of Hollin in many seasons. No folk dwell here now, but
many other creatures live here at all times, especially birds. Yet now
all things but you are silent. I can feel it. There is no sound for miles
about us, and your voices seem to make the ground echo. I do not
understand it.’
Gandalf looked up with sudden interest. ‘But what do you guess
is the reason?’ he asked. ‘Is there more in it than surprise at seeing
four hobbits, not to mention the rest of us, where people are so
seldom seen or heard?’
‘I hope that is it,’ answered Aragorn. ‘But I have a sense of watch-
fulness, and of fear, that I have never had here before.’
‘Then we must be more careful,’ said Gandalf. ‘If you bring a
Ranger with you, it is well to pay attention to him, especially if the
Ranger is Aragorn. We must stop talking aloud, rest quietly, and set
the watch.’
It was Sam’s turn that day to take the ﬁrst watch, but Aragorn
joined him. The others fell asleep. Then the silence grew until even
Sam felt it. The breathing of the sleepers could be plainly heard. The
swish of the pony’s tail and the occasional movements of his feet
became loud noises. Sam could hear his own joints creaking, if he
stirred. Dead silence was around him, and over all hung a clear blue
sky, as the Sun rode up from the East. Away in the South a dark
patch appeared, and grew, and drove north like ﬂying smoke in the
wind.
‘What’s that, Strider? It don’t look like a cloud,’ said Sam in a
whisper to Aragorn. He made no answer, he was gazing intently at the

sky; but before long Sam could see for himself what was approaching.
Flocks of birds, ﬂying at great speed, were wheeling and circling, and
traversing all the land as if they were searching for something; and
they were steadily drawing nearer.
‘Lie ﬂat and still!’ hissed Aragorn, pulling Sam down into the
shade of a holly-bush; for a whole regiment of birds had broken away
suddenly from the main host, and came, ﬂying low, straight towards
the ridge. Sam thought they were a kind of crow of large size. As
they passed overhead, in so dense a throng that their shadow followed
them darkly over the ground below, one harsh croak was heard.
Not until they had dwindled into the distance, north and west,
and the sky was again clear would Aragorn rise. Then he sprang up
and went and wakened Gandalf.
‘Regiments of black crows are ﬂying over all the land between the
Mountains and the Greyﬂood,’ he said, ‘and they have passed over
Hollin. They are not natives here; they are crebain out of Fangorn
and Dunland. I do not know what they are about: possibly there is
some trouble away south from which they are ﬂeeing; but I think
they are spying out the land. I have also glimpsed many hawks ﬂying
high up in the sky. I think we ought to move again this evening.
Hollin is no longer wholesome for us: it is being watched.’
‘And in that case so is the Redhorn Gate,’ said Gandalf; ‘and how
we can get over that without being seen, I cannot imagine. But we
will think of that when we must. As for moving as soon as it is dark,
I am afraid that you are right.’
‘Luckily our ﬁre made little smoke, and had burned low before
the crebain came,’ said Aragorn. ‘It must be put out and not lit again.’
‘Well if that isn’t a plague and a nuisance!’ said Pippin. The news:
no ﬁre, and a move again by night, had been broken to him, as soon
as he woke in the late afternoon. ‘All because of a pack of crows!
I had looked forward to a real good meal tonight: something hot.’
‘Well, you can go on looking forward,’ said Gandalf. ‘There may
be many unexpected feasts ahead for you. For myself I should like
a pipe to smoke in comfort, and warmer feet. However, we are certain
of one thing at any rate: it will get warmer as we get south.’
‘Too warm, I shouldn’t wonder,’ muttered Sam to Frodo. ‘But
I’m beginning to think it’s time we got a sight of that Fiery Mountain,
and saw the end of the Road, so to speak. I thought at ﬁrst that this
here Redhorn, or whatever its name is, might be it, till Gimli spoke
his piece. A fair jaw-cracker dwarf-language must be!’ Maps conveyed
nothing to Sam’s mind, and all distances in these strange lands
seemed so vast that he was quite out of his reckoning.
All that day the Company remained in hiding. The dark birds

passed over now and again; but as the westering Sun grew red they
disappeared southwards. At dusk the Company set out, and turning
now half east they steered their course towards Caradhras, which far
away still glowed faintly red in the last light of the vanished Sun.
One by one white stars sprang forth as the sky faded.
Guided by Aragorn they struck a good path. It looked to Frodo
like the remains of an ancient road, that had once been broad and
well planned, from Hollin to the mountain-pass. The Moon, now at
the full, rose over the mountains, and cast a pale light in which the
shadows of stones were black. Many of them looked to have been
worked by hands, though now they lay tumbled and ruinous in a
bleak, barren land.
It was the cold chill hour before the ﬁrst stir of dawn, and the
moon was low. Frodo looked up at the sky. Suddenly he saw or felt
a shadow pass over the high stars, as if for a moment they faded and
then ﬂashed out again. He shivered.
‘Did you see anything pass over?’ he whispered to Gandalf, who
was just ahead.
‘No, but I felt it, whatever it was,’ he answered. ‘It may be nothing,
only a wisp of thin cloud.’
‘It was moving fast then,’ muttered Aragorn, ‘and not with the
wind.’
Nothing further happened that night. The next morning dawned
even brighter than before. But the air was chill again; already the
wind was turning back towards the east. For two more nights they
marched on, climbing steadily but ever more slowly as their road
wound up into the hills, and the mountains towered up, nearer and
nearer. On the third morning Caradhras rose before them, a mighty
peak, tipped with snow like silver, but with sheer naked sides, dull
red as if stained with blood.
There was a black look in the sky, and the sun was wan. The wind
had gone now round to the north-east. Gandalf snuffed the air and
looked back.
‘Winter deepens behind us,’ he said quietly to Aragorn. ‘The
heights away north are whiter than they were; snow is lying far down
their shoulders. Tonight we shall be on our way high up towards the
Redhorn Gate. We may well be seen by watchers on that narrow
path, and waylaid by some evil; but the weather may prove a more
deadly enemy than any. What do you think of your course now,
Aragorn?’
Frodo overheard these words, and understood that Gandalf and
Aragorn were continuing some debate that had begun long before.
He listened anxiously.

‘I think no good of our course from beginning to end, as you know
well, Gandalf,’ answered Aragorn. ‘And perils known and unknown
will grow as we go on. But we must go on; and it is no good our
delaying the passage of the mountains. Further south there are no
passes, till one comes to the Gap of Rohan. I do not trust that way
since your news of Saruman. Who knows which side now the marshals
of the Horse-lords serve?’
‘Who knows indeed!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is another way, and
not by the pass of Caradhras: the dark and secret way that we have
spoken of.’
‘But let us not speak of it again! Not yet. Say nothing to the others,
I beg, not until it is plain that there is no other way.’
‘We must decide before we go further,’ answered Gandalf.
‘Then let us weigh the matter in our minds, while the others rest
and sleep,’ said Aragorn.
In the late afternoon, while the others were ﬁnishing their break-
fast, Gandalf and Aragorn went aside together and stood looking at
Caradhras. Its sides were now dark and sullen, and its head was in
grey cloud. Frodo watched them, wondering which way the debate
would go. When they returned to the Company Gandalf spoke, and
then he knew that it had been decided to face the weather and the
high pass. He was relieved. He could not guess what was the other
dark and secret way, but the very mention of it had seemed to ﬁll
Aragorn with dismay, and Frodo was glad that it had been
abandoned.
‘From signs that we have seen lately,’ said Gandalf, ‘I fear that
the Redhorn Gate may be watched; and also I have doubts of the
weather that is coming up behind. Snow may come. We must go
with all the speed that we can. Even so it will take us more than two
marches before we reach the top of the pass. Dark will come early
this evening. We must leave as soon as you can get ready.’
‘I will add a word of advice, if I may,’ said Boromir. ‘I was born
under the shadow of the White Mountains and know something of
journeys in the high places. We shall meet bitter cold, if no worse,
before we come down on the other side. It will not help us to keep
so secret that we are frozen to death. When we leave here, where
there are still a few trees and bushes, each of us should carry a faggot
of wood, as large as he can bear.’
‘And Bill could take a bit more, couldn’t you, lad?’ said Sam. The
pony looked at him mournfully.
‘Very well,’ said Gandalf. ‘But we must not use the wood – not
unless it is a choice between ﬁre and death.’
*
*
*

The Company set out again, with good speed at ﬁrst; but soon
their way became steep and difﬁcult. The twisting and climbing road
had in many places almost disappeared, and was blocked with many
fallen stones. The night grew deadly dark under great clouds. A bitter
wind swirled among the rocks. By midnight they had climbed to the
knees of the great mountains. The narrow path now wound under a
sheer wall of cliffs to the left, above which the grim ﬂanks of Caradhras
towered up invisible in the gloom; on the right was a gulf of darkness
where the land fell suddenly into a deep ravine.
Laboriously they climbed a sharp slope and halted for a moment
at the top. Frodo felt a soft touch on his face. He put out his arm
and saw the dim white ﬂakes of snow settling on his sleeve.
They went on. But before long the snow was falling fast, ﬁlling all
the air, and swirling into Frodo’s eyes. The dark bent shapes of
Gandalf and Aragorn only a pace or two ahead could hardly be seen.
‘I don’t like this at all,’ panted Sam just behind. ‘Snow’s all right
on a ﬁne morning, but I like to be in bed while it’s falling. I wish
this lot would go off to Hobbiton! Folk might welcome it there.’
Except on the high moors of the Northfarthing a heavy fall was rare
in the Shire, and was regarded as a pleasant event and a chance for
fun. No living hobbit (save Bilbo) could remember the Fell Winter
of 1311, when white wolves invaded the Shire over the frozen
Brandywine.
Gandalf halted. Snow was thick on his hood and shoulders; it was
already ankle-deep about his boots.
‘This is what I feared,’ he said. ‘What do you say now, Aragorn?’
‘That I feared it too,’ Aragorn answered, ‘but less than other
things. I knew the risk of snow, though it seldom falls heavily so far
south, save high up in the mountains. But we are not high yet; we
are still far down, where the paths are usually open all the winter.’
‘I wonder if this is a contrivance of the Enemy,’ said Boromir.
‘They say in my land that he can govern the storms in the Mountains
of Shadow that stand upon the borders of Mordor. He has strange
powers and many allies.’
‘His arm has grown long indeed,’ said Gimli, ‘if he can draw snow
down from the North to trouble us here three hundred leagues away.’
‘His arm has grown long,’ said Gandalf.
While they were halted, the wind died down, and the snow slack-
ened until it almost ceased. They tramped on again. But they had
not gone more than a furlong when the storm returned with fresh
fury. The wind whistled and the snow became a blinding blizzard.
Soon even Boromir found it hard to keep going. The hobbits, bent
nearly double, toiled along behind the taller folk, but it was plain

that they could not go much further, if the snow continued. Frodo’s
feet felt like lead. Pippin was dragging behind. Even Gimli, as stout
as any dwarf could be, was grumbling as he trudged.
The Company halted suddenly, as if they had come to an agree-
ment without any words being spoken. They heard eerie noises in
the darkness round them. It may have been only a trick of the wind
in the cracks and gullies of the rocky wall, but the sounds were those
of shrill cries, and wild howls of laughter. Stones began to fall from
the mountain-side, whistling over their heads, or crashing on the path
beside them. Every now and again they heard a dull rumble, as a
great boulder rolled down from hidden heights above.
‘We cannot go further tonight,’ said Boromir. ‘Let those call it the
wind who will; there are fell voices on the air; and these stones are
aimed at us.’
‘I do call it the wind,’ said Aragorn. ‘But that does not make what
you say untrue. There are many evil and unfriendly things in the
world that have little love for those that go on two legs, and yet are
not in league with Sauron, but have purposes of their own. Some
have been in this world longer than he.’
‘Caradhras was called the Cruel, and had an ill name,’ said Gimli,
‘long years ago, when rumour of Sauron had not been heard in these
lands.’
‘It matters little who is the enemy, if we cannot beat off his attack,’
said Gandalf.
‘But what can we do?’ cried Pippin miserably. He was leaning on
Merry and Frodo, and he was shivering.
‘Either stop where we are, or go back,’ said Gandalf. ‘It is no good
going on. Only a little higher, if I remember rightly, this path leaves
the cliff and runs into a wide shallow trough at the bottom of a long
hard slope. We should have no shelter there from snow, or stones –
or anything else.’
‘And it is no good going back while the storm holds,’ said Aragorn.
‘We have passed no place on the way up that offered more shelter
than this cliff-wall we are under now.’
‘Shelter!’ muttered Sam. ‘If this is shelter, then one wall and no
roof make a house.’
The Company now gathered together as close to the cliff as they
could. It faced southwards, and near the bottom it leaned out a little,
so that they hoped it would give them some protection from the
northerly wind and from the falling stones. But eddying blasts swirled
round them from every side, and the snow ﬂowed down in ever
denser clouds.
They huddled together with their backs to the wall. Bill the pony

stood patiently but dejectedly in front of the hobbits, and screened
them a little; but before long the drifting snow was above his hocks,
and it went on mounting. If they had had no larger companions the
hobbits would soon have been entirely buried.
A great sleepiness came over Frodo; he felt himself sinking fast
into a warm and hazy dream. He thought a ﬁre was heating his toes,
and out of the shadows on the other side of the hearth he heard Bilbo’s
voice speaking. I don’t think much of your diary, he said. Snowstorms on
January the twelfth: there was no need to come back to report that!
But I wanted rest and sleep, Bilbo, Frodo answered with an effort,
when he felt himself shaken, and he came back painfully to wakeful-
ness. Boromir had lifted him off the ground out of a nest of snow.
‘This will be the death of the halﬂings, Gandalf,’ said Boromir.
‘It is useless to sit here until the snow goes over our heads. We must
do something to save ourselves.’
‘Give them this,’ said Gandalf, searching in his pack and drawing
out a leathern ﬂask. ‘Just a mouthful each – for all of us. It is very
precious. It is miruvor, the cordial of Imladris. Elrond gave it to me
at our parting. Pass it round!’
As soon as Frodo had swallowed a little of the warm and fragrant
liquor he felt a new strength of heart, and the heavy drowsiness left
his limbs. The others also revived and found fresh hope and vigour.
But the snow did not relent. It whirled about them thicker than ever,
and the wind blew louder.
‘What do you say to ﬁre?’ asked Boromir suddenly. ‘The choice
seems near now between ﬁre and death, Gandalf. Doubtless we shall
be hidden from all unfriendly eyes when the snow has covered us,
but that will not help us.’
‘You may make a ﬁre, if you can,’ answered Gandalf. ‘If there are
any watchers that can endure this storm, then they can see us, ﬁre
or no.’
But though they had brought wood and kindlings by the advice
of Boromir, it passed the skill of Elf or even Dwarf to strike a ﬂame
that would hold amid the swirling wind or catch in the wet fuel. At
last reluctantly Gandalf himself took a hand. Picking up a faggot he
held it aloft for a moment, and then with a word of command, naur
an edraith ammen! he thrust the end of his staff into the midst of it.
At once a great spout of green and blue ﬂame sprang out, and the
wood ﬂared and sputtered.
‘If there are any to see, then I at least am revealed to them,’ he
said. ‘I have written Gandalf is here in signs that all can read from
Rivendell to the mouths of Anduin.’
But the Company cared no longer for watchers or unfriendly eyes.
Their hearts were rejoiced to see the light of the ﬁre. The wood

burned merrily; and though all round it the snow hissed, and pools
of slush crept under their feet, they warmed their hands gladly at the
blaze. There they stood, stooping in a circle round the little dancing
and blowing ﬂames. A red light was on their tired and anxious faces;
behind them the night was like a black wall.
But the wood was burning fast, and the snow still fell.
The ﬁre burned low, and the last faggot was thrown on.
‘The night is getting old,’ said Aragorn. ‘The dawn is not far off.’
‘If any dawn can pierce these clouds,’ said Gimli.
Boromir stepped out of the circle and stared up into the blackness.
‘The snow is growing less,’ he said, ‘and the wind is quieter.’
Frodo gazed wearily at the ﬂakes still falling out of the dark to be
revealed white for a moment in the light of the dying ﬁre; but for a
long time he could see no sign of their slackening. Then suddenly,
as sleep was beginning to creep over him again, he was aware that
the wind had indeed fallen, and the ﬂakes were becoming larger and
fewer. Very slowly a dim light began to grow. At last the snow stopped
altogether.
As the light grew stronger it showed a silent shrouded world.
Below their refuge were white humps and domes and shapeless deeps
beneath which the path that they had trodden was altogether lost;
but the heights above were hidden in great clouds still heavy with
the threat of snow.
Gimli looked up and shook his head. ‘Caradhras has not forgiven
us,’ he said. ‘He has more snow yet to ﬂing at us, if we go on. The
sooner we go back and down the better.’
To this all agreed, but their retreat was now difﬁcult. It might well
prove impossible. Only a few paces from the ashes of their ﬁre the
snow lay many feet deep, higher than the heads of the hobbits; in
places it had been scooped and piled by the wind into great drifts
against the cliff.
‘If Gandalf would go before us with a bright ﬂame, he might melt
a path for you,’ said Legolas. The storm had troubled him little, and
he alone of the Company remained still light of heart.
‘If Elves could ﬂy over mountains, they might fetch the Sun to
save us,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But I must have something to work on.
I cannot burn snow.’
‘Well,’ said Boromir, ‘when heads are at a loss bodies must serve,
as we say in my country. The strongest of us must seek a way. See!
Though all is now snow-clad, our path, as we came up, turned about
that shoulder of rock down yonder. It was there that the snow ﬁrst
began to burden us. If we could reach that point, maybe it would
prove easier beyond. It is no more than a furlong off, I guess.’

‘Then let us force a path thither, you and I!’ said Aragorn.
Aragorn was the tallest of the Company, but Boromir, little less
in height, was broader and heavier in build. He led the way, and
Aragorn followed him. Slowly they moved off, and were soon toiling
heavily. In places the snow was breast-high, and often Boromir
seemed to be swimming or burrowing with his great arms rather than
walking.
Legolas watched them for a while with a smile upon his lips, and
then he turned to the others. ‘The strongest must seek a way, say
you? But I say: let a ploughman plough, but choose an otter for
swimming, and for running light over grass and leaf, or over snow –
an Elf.’
With that he sprang forth nimbly, and then Frodo noticed as if
for the ﬁrst time, though he had long known it, that the Elf had no
boots, but wore only light shoes, as he always did, and his feet made
little imprint in the snow.
‘Farewell!’ he said to Gandalf. ‘I go to ﬁnd the Sun!’ Then swift
as a runner over ﬁrm sand he shot away, and quickly overtaking the
toiling men, with a wave of his hand he passed them, and sped into
the distance, and vanished round the rocky turn.
The others waited huddled together, watching until Boromir and
Aragorn dwindled into black specks in the whiteness. At length they
too passed from sight. The time dragged on. The clouds lowered,
and now a few ﬂakes of snow came curling down again.
An hour, maybe, went by, though it seemed far longer, and then
at last they saw Legolas coming back. At the same time Boromir
and Aragorn reappeared round the bend far behind him and came
labouring up the slope.
‘Well,’ cried Legolas as he ran up, ‘I have not brought the Sun.
She is walking in the blue ﬁelds of the South, and a little wreath of
snow on this Redhorn hillock troubles her not at all. But I have
brought back a gleam of good hope for those who are doomed to go
on feet. There is the greatest wind-drift of all just beyond the turn,
and there our Strong Men were almost buried. They despaired, until
I returned and told them that the drift was little wider than a wall.
And on the other side the snow suddenly grows less, while further
down it is no more than a white coverlet to cool a hobbit’s toes.’
‘Ah, it is as I said,’ growled Gimli. ‘It was no ordinary storm. It
is the ill will of Caradhras. He does not love Elves and Dwarves, and
that drift was laid to cut off our escape.’
‘But happily your Caradhras has forgotten that you have Men with
you,’ said Boromir, who came up at that moment. ‘And doughty
Men too, if I may say it; though lesser men with spades might have

served you better. Still, we have thrust a lane through the drift; and
for that all here may be grateful who cannot run as light as Elves.’
‘But how are we to get down there, even if you have cut through
the drift?’ said Pippin, voicing the thought of all the hobbits.
‘Have hope!’ said Boromir. ‘I am weary, but I still have some
strength left, and Aragorn too. We will bear the little folk. The others
no doubt will make shift to tread the path behind us. Come, Master
Peregrin! I will begin with you.’
He lifted up the hobbit. ‘Cling to my back! I shall need my arms,’
he said and strode forward. Aragorn with Merry came behind. Pippin
marvelled at his strength, seeing the passage that he had already
forced with no other tool than his great limbs. Even now, burdened
as he was, he was widening the track for those who followed, thrusting
the snow aside as he went.
They came at length to the great drift. It was ﬂung across the
mountain-path like a sheer and sudden wall, and its crest, sharp as
if shaped with knives, reared up more than twice the height of Boro-
mir; but through the middle a passage had been beaten, rising and
falling like a bridge. On the far side Merry and Pippin were set down,
and there they waited with Legolas for the rest of the Company to
arrive.
After a while Boromir returned carrying Sam. Behind in the narrow
but now well-trodden track came Gandalf, leading Bill with Gimli
perched among the baggage. Last came Aragorn carrying Frodo.
They passed through the lane; but hardly had Frodo touched the
ground when with a deep rumble there rolled down a fall of stones
and slithering snow. The spray of it half blinded the Company as
they crouched against the cliff, and when the air cleared again they
saw that the path was blocked behind them.
‘Enough, enough!’ cried Gimli. ‘We are departing as quickly as
we may!’ And indeed with that last stroke the malice of the mountain
seemed to be expended, as if Caradhras was satisﬁed that the invaders
had been beaten off and would not dare to return. The threat of
snow lifted; the clouds began to break and the light grew broader.
As Legolas had reported, they found that the snow became steadily
more shallow as they went down, so that even the hobbits could
trudge along. Soon they all stood once more on the ﬂat shelf at the
head of the steep slope where they had felt the ﬁrst ﬂakes of snow
the night before.
The morning was now far advanced. From the high place they
looked back westwards over the lower lands. Far away in the tumble
of country that lay at the foot of the mountain was the dell from
which they had started to climb the pass.
Frodo’s legs ached. He was chilled to the bone and hungry; and

his head was dizzy as he thought of the long and painful march
downhill. Black specks swam before his eyes. He rubbed them, but
the black specks remained. In the distance below him, but still high
above the lower foothills, dark dots were circling in the air.
‘The birds again!’ said Aragorn, pointing down.
‘That cannot be helped now,’ said Gandalf. ‘Whether they are
good or evil, or have nothing to do with us at all, we must go down
at once. Not even on the knees of Caradhras will we wait for another
night-fall!’
A cold wind ﬂowed down behind them, as they turned their
backs on the Redhorn Gate, and stumbled wearily down the slope.
Caradhras had defeated them.

Chapter 4
A  J O U R N E Y  I N  T H E  D A R K
It was evening, and the grey light was again waning fast, when they
halted for the night. They were very weary. The mountains were
veiled in deepening dusk, and the wind was cold. Gandalf spared
them one more mouthful each of the miruvor of Rivendell. When
they had eaten some food he called a council.
‘We cannot, of course, go on again tonight,’ he said. ‘The attack
on the Redhorn Gate has tired us out, and we must rest here for a
while.’
‘And then where are we to go?’ asked Frodo.
‘We still have our journey and our errand before us,’ answered
Gandalf. ‘We have no choice but to go on, or to return to Rivendell.’
Pippin’s face brightened visibly at the mere mention of return to
Rivendell; Merry and Sam looked up hopefully. But Aragorn and
Boromir made no sign. Frodo looked troubled.
‘I wish I was back there,’ he said. ‘But how can I return without
shame – unless there is indeed no other way, and we are already
defeated?’
‘You are right, Frodo,’ said Gandalf: ‘to go back is to admit defeat,
and face worse defeat to come. If we go back now, then the Ring
must remain there: we shall not be able to set out again. Then sooner
or later Rivendell will be besieged, and after a brief and bitter time
it will be destroyed. The Ringwraiths are deadly enemies, but they
are only shadows yet of the power and terror they would possess if
the Ruling Ring was on their master’s hand again.’
‘Then we must go on, if there is a way,’ said Frodo with a sigh.
Sam sank back into gloom.
‘There is a way that we may attempt,’ said Gandalf. ‘I thought
from the beginning, when ﬁrst I considered this journey, that we
should try it. But it is not a pleasant way, and I have not spoken of
it to the Company before. Aragorn was against it, until the pass over
the mountains had at least been tried.’
‘If it is a worse road than the Redhorn Gate, then it must be evil
indeed,’ said Merry. ‘But you had better tell us about it, and let us
know the worst at once.’
‘The road that I speak of leads to the Mines of Moria,’ said
Gandalf. Only Gimli lifted up his head; a smouldering ﬁre was in his
eyes. On all the others a dread fell at the mention of that name. Even
to the hobbits it was a legend of vague fear.

‘The road may lead to Moria, but how can we hope that it will
lead through Moria?’ said Aragorn darkly.
‘It is a name of ill omen,’ said Boromir. ‘Nor do I see the need
to go there. If we cannot cross the mountains, let us journey south-
wards, until we come to the Gap of Rohan, where men are friendly
to my people, taking the road that I followed on my way hither. Or
we might pass by and cross the Isen into Langstrand and Lebennin,
and so come to Gondor from the regions nigh to the sea.’
‘Things have changed since you came north, Boromir,’ answered
Gandalf. ‘Did you not hear what I told you of Saruman? With him
I may have business of my own ere all is over. But the Ring must
not come near Isengard, if that can by any means be prevented. The
Gap of Rohan is closed to us while we go with the Bearer.
‘As for the longer road: we cannot afford the time. We might
spend a year in such a journey, and we should pass through many
lands that are empty and harbourless. Yet they would not be safe.
The watchful eyes both of Saruman and of the Enemy are on them.
When you came north, Boromir, you were in the Enemy’s eyes only
one stray wanderer from the South and a matter of small concern to
him: his mind was busy with the pursuit of the Ring. But you return
now as a member of the Ring’s Company, and you are in peril as
long as you remain with us. The danger will increase with every
league that we go south under the naked sky.
‘Since our open attempt on the mountain-pass our plight has
become more desperate, I fear. I see now little hope, if we do not
soon vanish from sight for a while, and cover our trail. Therefore I
advise that we should go neither over the mountains, nor round them,
but under them. That is a road at any rate that the Enemy will least
expect us to take.’
‘We do not know what he expects,’ said Boromir. ‘He may watch
all roads, likely and unlikely. In that case to enter Moria would be
to walk into a trap, hardly better than knocking at the gates of the
Dark Tower itself. The name of Moria is black.’
‘You speak of what you do not know, when you liken Moria to
the stronghold of Sauron,’ answered Gandalf. ‘I alone of you have
ever been in the dungeons of the Dark Lord, and only in his older
and lesser dwelling in Dol Guldur. Those who pass the gates of
Barad-duˆr do not return. But I would not lead you into Moria if
there were no hope of coming out again. If there are Orcs there, it
may prove ill for us, that is true. But most of the Orcs of the Misty
Mountains were scattered or destroyed in the Battle of Five Armies.
The Eagles report that Orcs are gathering again from afar; but there
is a hope that Moria is still free.
‘There is even a chance that Dwarves are there, and that in some

deep hall of his fathers, Balin son of Fundin may be found. However
it may prove, one must tread the path that need chooses!’
‘I will tread the path with you, Gandalf !’ said Gimli. ‘I will go
and look on the halls of Durin, whatever may wait there – if you can
ﬁnd the doors that are shut.’
‘Good, Gimli!’ said Gandalf. ‘You encourage me. We will seek
the hidden doors together. And we will come through. In the ruins
of the Dwarves, a dwarf ’s head will be less easy to bewilder than
Elves or Men or Hobbits. Yet it will not be the ﬁrst time that I have
been to Moria. I sought there long for Thra´in son of Thro´ r after he
was lost. I passed through, and I came out again alive!’
‘I too once passed the Dimrill Gate,’ said Aragorn quietly; ‘but
though I also came out again, the memory is very evil. I do not wish
to enter Moria a second time.’
‘And I don’t wish to enter it even once,’ said Pippin.
‘Nor me,’ muttered Sam.
‘Of course not!’ said Gandalf. ‘Who would? But the question is:
who will follow me, if I lead you there?’
‘I will,’ said Gimli eagerly.
‘I will,’ said Aragorn heavily. ‘You followed my lead almost to
disaster in the snow, and have said no word of blame. I will follow
your lead now – if this last warning does not move you. It is not of
the Ring, nor of us others that I am thinking now, but of you, Gandalf.
And I say to you: if you pass the doors of Moria, beware!’
‘I will not go,’ said Boromir; ‘not unless the vote of the whole
Company is against me. What do Legolas and the little folk say? The
Ring-bearer’s voice surely should be heard?’
‘I do not wish to go to Moria,’ said Legolas.
The hobbits said nothing. Sam looked at Frodo. At last Frodo
spoke. ‘I do not wish to go,’ he said; ‘but neither do I wish to refuse
the advice of Gandalf. I beg that there should be no vote, until we
have slept on it. Gandalf will get votes easier in the light of the
morning than in this cold gloom. How the wind howls!’
At these words all fell into silent thought. They heard the wind
hissing among the rocks and trees, and there was a howling and
wailing round them in the empty spaces of the night.
Suddenly Aragorn leapt to his feet. ‘How the wind howls!’ he
cried. ‘It is howling with wolf-voices. The Wargs have come west of
the Mountains!’
‘Need we wait until morning then?’ said Gandalf. ‘It is as I said.
The hunt is up! Even if we live to see the dawn, who now will wish
to journey south by night with the wild wolves on his trail?’
‘How far is Moria?’ asked Boromir.

‘There was a door south-west of Caradhras, some ﬁfteen miles as
the crow ﬂies, and maybe twenty as the wolf runs,’ answered Gandalf
grimly.
‘Then let us start as soon as it is light tomorrow, if we can,’ said
Boromir. ‘The wolf that one hears is worse than the orc that one
fears.’
‘True!’ said Aragorn, loosening his sword in its sheath. ‘But where
the warg howls, there also the orc prowls.’
‘I wish I had taken Elrond’s advice,’ muttered Pippin to Sam. ‘I
am no good after all. There is not enough of the breed of Bandobras
the Bullroarer in me: these howls freeze my blood. I don’t ever
remember feeling so wretched.’
‘My heart’s right down in my toes, Mr. Pippin,’ said Sam. ‘But we
aren’t etten yet, and there are some stout folk here with us. Whatever
may be in store for old Gandalf, I’ll wager it isn’t a wolf ’s belly.’
For their defence in the night the Company climbed to the top of
the small hill under which they had been sheltering. It was crowned
with a knot of old and twisted trees, about which lay a broken circle
of boulder-stones. In the midst of this they lit a ﬁre, for there was
no hope that darkness and silence would keep their trail from dis-
covery by the hunting packs.
Round the ﬁre they sat, and those that were not on guard dozed
uneasily. Poor Bill the pony trembled and sweated where he stood.
The howling of the wolves was now all round them, sometimes nearer
and sometimes further off. In the dead of night many shining eyes
were seen peering over the brow of the hill. Some advanced almost
to the ring of stones. At a gap in the circle a great dark wolf-shape
could be seen halted, gazing at them. A shuddering howl broke from
him, as if he were a captain summoning his pack to the assault.
Gandalf stood up and strode forward, holding his staff aloft.
‘Listen, Hound of Sauron!’ he cried. ‘Gandalf is here. Fly, if you
value your foul skin! I will shrivel you from tail to snout, if you come
within this ring.’
The wolf snarled and sprang towards them with a great leap. At
that moment there was a sharp twang. Legolas had loosed his bow.
There was a hideous yell, and the leaping shape thudded to the
ground; the Elvish arrow had pierced its throat. The watching eyes
were suddenly extinguished. Gandalf and Aragorn strode forward,
but the hill was deserted; the hunting packs had ﬂed. All about them
the darkness grew silent, and no cry came on the sighing wind.
The night was old, and westward the waning moon was setting,
gleaming ﬁtfully through the breaking clouds. Suddenly Frodo started

from sleep. Without warning a storm of howls broke out ﬁerce and
wild all about the camp. A great host of Wargs had gathered silently
and was now attacking them from every side at once.
‘Fling fuel on the ﬁre!’ cried Gandalf to the hobbits. ‘Draw your
blades, and stand back to back!’
In the leaping light, as the fresh wood blazed up, Frodo saw many
grey shapes spring over the ring of stones. More and more followed.
Through the throat of one huge leader Aragorn passed his sword
with a thrust; with a great sweep Boromir hewed the head off another.
Beside them Gimli stood with his stout legs apart, wielding his dwarf-
axe. The bow of Legolas was singing.
In the wavering ﬁrelight Gandalf seemed suddenly to grow: he
rose up, a great menacing shape like the monument of some ancient
king of stone set upon a hill. Stooping like a cloud, he lifted a burning
branch and strode to meet the wolves. They gave back before him.
High in the air he tossed the blazing brand. It ﬂared with a sudden
white radiance like lightning; and his voice rolled like thunder.
‘Naur an edraith ammen! Naur dan i ngaurhoth!’ he cried.
There was a roar and a crackle, and the tree above him burst into
a leaf and bloom of blinding ﬂame. The ﬁre leapt from tree-top to
tree-top. The whole hill was crowned with dazzling light. The swords
and knives of the defenders shone and ﬂickered. The last arrow of
Legolas kindled in the air as it ﬂew, and plunged burning into the
heart of a great wolf-chieftain. All the others ﬂed.
Slowly the ﬁre died till nothing was left but falling ash and sparks;
a bitter smoke curled above the burned tree-stumps, and blew darkly
from the hill, as the ﬁrst light of dawn came dimly in the sky. Their
enemies were routed and did not return.
‘What did I tell you, Mr. Pippin?’ said Sam, sheathing his sword.
‘Wolves won’t get him. That was an eye-opener, and no mistake!
Nearly singed the hair off my head!’
When the full light of the morning came no signs of the wolves
were to be found, and they looked in vain for the bodies of the dead.
No trace of the ﬁght remained but the charred trees and the arrows
of Legolas lying on the hill-top. All were undamaged save one of
which only the point was left.
‘It is as I feared,’ said Gandalf. ‘These were no ordinary wolves
hunting for food in the wilderness. Let us eat quickly and go!’
That day the weather changed again, almost as if it was at the
command of some power that had no longer any use for snow, since
they had retreated from the pass, a power that wished now to have
a clear light in which things that moved in the wild could be seen
from far away. The wind had been turning through north to

north-west during the night, and now it failed. The clouds vanished
southwards and the sky was opened, high and blue. As they stood
upon the hillside, ready to depart, a pale sunlight gleamed over the
mountain-tops.
‘We must reach the doors before sunset,’ said Gandalf, ‘or I fear
we shall not reach them at all. It is not far, but our path may be
winding, for here Aragorn cannot guide us; he has seldom walked in
this country, and only once have I been under the west wall of Moria,
and that was long ago.
‘There it lies,’ he said, pointing away south-eastwards to where
the mountains’ sides fell sheer into the shadows at their feet. In the
distance could be dimly seen a line of bare cliffs, and in their midst,
taller than the rest, one great grey wall. ‘When we left the pass I led
you southwards, and not back to our starting point, as some of you
may have noticed. It is well that I did so, for now we have several
miles less to cross, and haste is needed. Let us go!’
‘I do not know which to hope,’ said Boromir grimly: ‘that Gandalf
will ﬁnd what he seeks, or that coming to the cliff we shall ﬁnd the
gates lost for ever. All choices seem ill, and to be caught between
wolves and the wall the likeliest chance. Lead on!’
Gimli now walked ahead by the wizard’s side, so eager was he to
come to Moria. Together they led the Company back towards the
mountains. The only road of old to Moria from the west had lain
along the course of a stream, the Sirannon, that ran out from the
feet of the cliffs near where the doors had stood. But either Gandalf
was astray, or else the land had changed in recent years; for he did
not strike the stream where he looked to ﬁnd it, only a few miles
southwards from their start.
The morning was passing towards noon, and still the Company
wandered and scrambled in a barren country of red stones. Nowhere
could they see any gleam of water or hear any sound of it. All was
bleak and dry. Their hearts sank. They saw no living thing, and not
a bird was in the sky; but what the night would bring, if it caught
them in that lost land, none of them cared to think.
Suddenly Gimli, who had pressed on ahead, called back to them.
He was standing on a knoll and pointing to the right. Hurrying up
they saw below them a deep and narrow channel. It was empty and
silent, and hardly a trickle of water ﬂowed among the brown and
red-stained stones of its bed; but on the near side there was a path,
much broken and decayed, that wound its way among the ruined
walls and paving-stones of an ancient highroad.
‘Ah! Here it is at last!’ said Gandalf. ‘This is where the stream
ran: Sirannon, the Gate-stream, they used to call it. But what has

happened to the water, I cannot guess; it used to be swift and noisy.
Come! We must hurry on. We are late.’
The Company were footsore and tired; but they trudged doggedly
along the rough and winding track for many miles. The sun turned
from the noon and began to go west. After a brief halt and a hasty
meal they went on again. Before them the mountains frowned, but
their path lay in a deep trough of land and they could see only the
higher shoulders and the far eastward peaks.
At length they came to a sharp bend. There the road, which had
been veering southwards between the brink of the channel and a
steep fall of the land to the left, turned and went due east again.
Rounding the corner they saw before them a low cliff, some ﬁve
fathoms high, with a broken and jagged top. Over it a trickling water
dripped, through a wide cleft that seemed to have been carved out
by a fall that had once been strong and full.
‘Indeed things have changed!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is no mis-
taking the place. There is all that remains of the Stair Falls. If I
remember right, there was a ﬂight of steps cut in the rock at their
side, but the main road wound away left and climbed with several
loops up to the level ground at the top. There used to be a shallow
valley beyond the falls right up to the Walls of Moria, and the Siran-
non ﬂowed through it with the road beside it. Let us go and see what
things are like now!’
They found the stone steps without difﬁculty, and Gimli sprang
swiftly up them, followed by Gandalf and Frodo. When they reached
the top they saw that they could go no further that way, and the
reason for the drying up of the Gate-stream was revealed. Behind
them the sinking Sun ﬁlled the cool western sky with glimmering
gold. Before them stretched a dark still lake. Neither sky nor sunset
was reﬂected on its sullen surface. The Sirannon had been dammed
and had ﬁlled all the valley. Beyond the ominous water were reared
vast cliffs, their stern faces pallid in the fading light: ﬁnal and impass-
able. No sign of gate or entrance, not a ﬁssure or crack could Frodo
see in the frowning stone.
‘There are the Walls of Moria,’ said Gandalf, pointing across the
water. ‘And there the Gate stood once upon a time, the Elven Door
at the end of the road from Hollin by which we have come. But this
way is blocked. None of the Company, I guess, will wish to swim
this gloomy water at the end of the day. It has an unwholesome look.’
‘We must ﬁnd a way round the northern edge,’ said Gimli. ‘The
ﬁrst thing for the Company to do is to climb up by the main path
and see where that will lead us. Even if there were no lake, we could
not get our baggage-pony up this stair.’

‘But in any case we cannot take the poor beast into the Mines,’
said Gandalf. ‘The road under the mountains is a dark road, and there
are places narrow and steep which he cannot tread, even if we can.’
‘Poor old Bill!’ said Frodo. ‘I had not thought of that. And poor
Sam! I wonder what he will say?’
‘I am sorry,’ said Gandalf. ‘Poor Bill has been a useful companion,
and it goes to my heart to turn him adrift now. I would have travelled
lighter and brought no animal, least of all this one that Sam is fond
of, if I had had my way. I feared all along that we should be obliged
to take this road.’
The day was drawing to its end, and cold stars were glinting in
the sky high above the sunset, when the Company, with all the speed
they could, climbed up the slopes and reached the side of the lake.
In breadth it looked to be no more than two or three furlongs at the
widest point. How far it stretched away southward they could not
see in the failing light; but its northern end was no more than half a
mile from where they stood, and between the stony ridges that
enclosed the valley and the water’s edge there was a rim of open
ground. They hurried forward, for they had still a mile or two to go
before they could reach the point on the far shore that Gandalf was
making for; and then he had still to ﬁnd the doors.
When they came to the northernmost corner of the lake they found
a narrow creek that barred their way. It was green and stagnant,
thrust out like a slimy arm towards the enclosing hills. Gimli strode
forward undeterred, and found that the water was shallow, no more
than ankle-deep at the edge. Behind him they walked in ﬁle, threading
their way with care, for under the weedy pools were sliding and greasy
stones, and footing was treacherous. Frodo shuddered with disgust
at the touch of the dark unclean water on his feet.
As Sam, the last of the Company, led Bill up on to the dry ground
on the far side, there came a soft sound: a swish, followed by a plop,
as if a ﬁsh had disturbed the still surface of the water. Turning quickly
they saw ripples, black-edged with shadow in the waning light: great
rings were widening outwards from a point far out in the lake. There
was a bubbling noise, and then silence. The dusk deepened, and the
last gleams of the sunset were veiled in cloud.
Gandalf now pressed on at a great pace, and the others followed
as quickly as they could. They reached the strip of dry land between
the lake and the cliffs: it was narrow, often hardly a dozen yards
across, and encumbered with fallen rock and stones; but they found
a way, hugging the cliff, and keeping as far from the dark water as
they might. A mile southwards along the shore they came upon holly
trees. Stumps and dead boughs were rotting in the shallows, the

remains it seemed of old thickets, or of a hedge that had once lined
the road across the drowned valley. But close under the cliff there
stood, still strong and living, two tall trees, larger than any trees of
holly that Frodo had ever seen or imagined. Their great roots spread
from the wall to the water. Under the looming cliffs they had looked
like mere bushes, when seen far off from the top of the Stair; but
now they towered overhead, stiff, dark, and silent, throwing deep
night-shadows about their feet, standing like sentinel pillars at the
end of the road.
‘Well, here we are at last!’ said Gandalf. ‘Here the Elven-way from
Hollin ended. Holly was the token of the people of that land, and they
planted it here to mark the end of their domain; for the West-door was
made chieﬂy for their use in their trafﬁc with the Lords of Moria. Those
were happier days, when there was still close friendship at times
between folk of different race, even between Dwarves and Elves.’
‘It was not the fault of the Dwarves that the friendship waned,’
said Gimli.
‘I have not heard that it was the fault of the Elves,’ said Legolas.
‘I have heard both,’ said Gandalf; ‘and I will not give judgement
now. But I beg you two, Legolas and Gimli, at least to be friends,
and to help me. I need you both. The doors are shut and hidden,
and the sooner we ﬁnd them the better. Night is at hand!’
Turning to the others he said: ‘While I am searching, will you
each make ready to enter the Mines? For here I fear we must say
farewell to our good beast of burden. You must lay aside much of
the stuff that we brought against bitter weather: you will not need it
inside, nor, I hope, when we come through and journey on down
into the South. Instead each of us must take a share of what the pony
carried, especially the food and the water-skins.’
‘But you can’t leave poor old Bill behind in this forsaken place,
Mr. Gandalf !’ cried Sam, angry and distressed. ‘I won’t have it, and
that’s ﬂat. After he has come so far and all!’
‘I am sorry, Sam,’ said the wizard. ‘But when the Door opens I
do not think you will be able to drag your Bill inside, into the long
dark of Moria. You will have to choose between Bill and your master.’
‘He’d follow Mr. Frodo into a dragon’s den, if I led him,’ protested
Sam. ‘It’d be nothing short of murder to turn him loose with all these
wolves about.’
‘It will be short of murder, I hope,’ said Gandalf. He laid his hand
on the pony’s head, and spoke in a low voice. ‘Go with words of
guard and guiding on you,’ he said. ‘You are a wise beast, and have
learned much in Rivendell. Make your ways to places where you can
ﬁnd grass, and so come in time to Elrond’s house, or wherever you
wish to go.

‘There, Sam! He will have quite as much chance of escaping wolves
and getting home as we have.’
Sam stood sullenly by the pony and returned no answer. Bill,
seeming to understand well what was going on, nuzzled up to him,
putting his nose to Sam’s ear. Sam burst into tears, and fumbled
with the straps, unlading all the pony’s packs and throwing them on
the ground. The others sorted out the goods, making a pile of all
that could be left behind, and dividing up the rest.
When this was done they turned to watch Gandalf. He appeared
to have done nothing. He was standing between the two trees gazing
at the blank wall of the cliff, as if he would bore a hole into it with
his eyes. Gimli was wandering about, tapping the stone here and
there with his axe. Legolas was pressed against the rock, as if listening.
‘Well, here we are and all ready,’ said Merry; ‘but where are the
Doors? I can’t see any sign of them.’
‘Dwarf-doors are not made to be seen when shut,’ said Gimli.
‘They are invisible, and their own makers cannot ﬁnd them or open
them, if their secret is forgotten.’
‘But this Door was not made to be a secret known only to
Dwarves,’ said Gandalf, coming suddenly to life and turning round.
‘Unless things are altogether changed, eyes that know what to look
for may discover the signs.’
He walked forward to the wall. Right between the shadow of the
trees there was a smooth space, and over this he passed his hands to
and fro, muttering words under his breath. Then he stepped back.
‘Look!’ he said. ‘Can you see anything now?’
The Moon now shone upon the grey face of the rock; but they
could see nothing else for a while. Then slowly on the surface, where
the wizard’s hands had passed, faint lines appeared, like slender veins
of silver running in the stone. At ﬁrst they were no more than pale
gossamer-threads, so ﬁne that they only twinkled ﬁtfully where the
Moon caught them, but steadily they grew broader and clearer, until
their design could be guessed.
At the top, as high as Gandalf could reach, was an arch of inter-
lacing letters in an Elvish character. Below, though the threads were
in places blurred or broken, the outline could be seen of an anvil and
a hammer surmounted by a crown with seven stars. Beneath these
again were two trees, each bearing crescent moons. More clearly than
all else there shone forth in the middle of the door a single star with
many rays.
‘There are the emblems of Durin!’ cried Gimli.
‘And there is the Tree of the High Elves!’ said Legolas.
‘And the Star of the House of Fe¨anor,’ said Gandalf. ‘They are
wrought of ithildin that mirrors only starlight and moonlight, and


sleeps until it is touched by one who speaks words now long forgotten
in Middle-earth. It is long since I heard them, and I thought deeply
before I could recall them to my mind.’
‘What does the writing say?’ asked Frodo, who was trying to
decipher the inscription on the arch. ‘I thought I knew the elf-letters,
but I cannot read these.’
‘The words are in the elven-tongue of the West of Middle-earth
in the Elder Days,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But they do not say anything
of importance to us. They say only: The Doors of Durin, Lord of Moria.
Speak, friend, and enter. And underneath small and faint is written:
I, Narvi, made them. Celebrimbor of Hollin drew these signs.’
‘What does it mean by speak, friend, and enter?’ asked Merry.
‘That is plain enough,’ said Gimli. ‘If you are a friend, speak the
password, and the doors will open, and you can enter.’
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf, ‘these doors are probably governed by words.
Some dwarf-gates will open only at special times, or for particular
persons; and some have locks and keys that are still needed when all
necessary times and words are known. These doors have no key. In
the days of Durin they were not secret. They usually stood open and
doorwards sat here. But if they were shut, any who knew the opening
word could speak it and pass in. At least so it is recorded, is it not,
Gimli?’
‘It is,’ said the dwarf. ‘But what the word was is not remembered.
Narvi and his craft and all his kindred have vanished from the earth.’
‘But do not you know the word, Gandalf ?’ asked Boromir in surprise.
‘No!’ said the wizard.
The others looked dismayed; only Aragorn, who knew Gandalf
well, remained silent and unmoved.
‘Then what was the use of bringing us to this accursed spot?’ cried
Boromir, glancing back with a shudder at the dark water. ‘You told
us that you had once passed through the Mines. How could that be,
if you did not know how to enter?’
‘The answer to your ﬁrst question, Boromir,’ said the wizard, ‘is
that I do not know the word – yet. But we shall soon see. And,’ he
added, with a glint in his eyes under their bristling brows, ‘you may
ask what is the use of my deeds when they are proved useless. As for
your other question: do you doubt my tale? Or have you no wits left?
I did not enter this way. I came from the East.
‘If you wish to know, I will tell you that these doors open outwards.
From the inside you may thrust them open with your hands. From
the outside nothing will move them save the spell of command. They
cannot be forced inwards.’
‘What are you going to do then?’ asked Pippin, undaunted by the
wizard’s bristling brows.

‘Knock on the doors with your head, Peregrin Took,’ said Gandalf.
‘But if that does not shatter them, and I am allowed a little peace
from foolish questions, I will seek for the opening words.
‘I once knew every spell in all the tongues of Elves or Men or
Orcs, that was ever used for such a purpose. I can still remember
ten score of them without searching in my mind. But only a few
trials, I think, will be needed; and I shall not have to call on Gimli
for words of the secret dwarf-tongue that they teach to none. The
opening words were Elvish, like the writing on the arch: that seems
certain.’
He stepped up to the rock again, and lightly touched with his staff
the silver star in the middle beneath the sign of the anvil.
Annon edhellen, edro hi ammen!
Fennas nogothrim, lasto beth lammen!
he said in a commanding voice. The silver lines faded, but the blank
grey stone did not stir.
Many times he repeated these words in different order, or varied
them. Then he tried other spells, one after another, speaking now
faster and louder, now soft and slow. Then he spoke many single
words of Elvish speech. Nothing happened. The cliff towered into
the night, the countless stars were kindled, the wind blew cold, and
the doors stood fast.
Again Gandalf approached the wall, and lifting up his arms he
spoke in tones of command and rising wrath. Edro, edro! he cried, and
struck the rock with his staff. Open, open! he shouted, and followed it
with the same command in every language that had ever been spoken
in the West of Middle-earth. Then he threw his staff on the ground,
and sat down in silence.
At that moment from far off the wind bore to their listening ears
the howling of wolves. Bill the pony started in fear, and Sam sprang
to his side and whispered softly to him.
‘Do not let him run away!’ said Boromir. ‘It seems that we shall
need him still, if the wolves do not ﬁnd us. How I hate this foul
pool!’ He stooped and picking up a large stone he cast it far into the
dark water.
The stone vanished with a soft slap; but at the same instant there
was a swish and a bubble. Great rippling rings formed on the surface
out beyond where the stone had fallen, and they moved slowly
towards the foot of the cliff.
‘Why did you do that, Boromir?’ said Frodo. ‘I hate this place,
too, and I am afraid. I don’t know of what: not of wolves, or the

dark behind the doors, but of something else. I am afraid of the pool.
Don’t disturb it!’
‘I wish we could get away!’ said Merry.
‘Why doesn’t Gandalf do something quick?’ said Pippin.
Gandalf took no notice of them. He sat with his head bowed,
either in despair or in anxious thought. The mournful howling of the
wolves was heard again. The ripples on the water grew and came
closer; some were already lapping on the shore.
With a suddenness that startled them all the wizard sprang to his
feet. He was laughing! ‘I have it!’ he cried. ‘Of course, of course!
Absurdly simple, like most riddles when you see the answer.’
Picking up his staff he stood before the rock and said in a clear
voice: Mellon!
The star shone out brieﬂy and faded again. Then silently a great
doorway was outlined, though not a crack or joint had been visible
before. Slowly it divided in the middle and swung outwards inch by
inch, until both doors lay back against the wall. Through the opening
a shadowy stair could be seen climbing steeply up; but beyond the
lower steps the darkness was deeper than the night. The Company
stared in wonder.
‘I was wrong after all,’ said Gandalf, ‘and Gimli too. Merry, of all
people, was on the right track. The opening word was inscribed on
the archway all the time! The translation should have been: Say
‘‘Friend’’ and enter. I had only to speak the Elvish word for friend
and the doors opened. Quite simple. Too simple for a learned lore-
master in these suspicious days. Those were happier times. Now let
us go!’
He strode forward and set his foot on the lowest step. But at that
moment several things happened. Frodo felt something seize him by
the ankle, and he fell with a cry. Bill the pony gave a wild neigh of
fear, and turned tail and dashed away along the lakeside into the
darkness. Sam leaped after him, and then hearing Frodo’s cry he ran
back again, weeping and cursing. The others swung round and saw
the waters of the lake seething, as if a host of snakes were swimming
up from the southern end.
Out from the water a long sinuous tentacle had crawled; it was
pale-green and luminous and wet. Its ﬁngered end had hold of
Frodo’s foot, and was dragging him into the water. Sam on his knees
was now slashing at it with a knife.
The arm let go of Frodo, and Sam pulled him away, crying out
for help. Twenty other arms came rippling out. The dark water
boiled, and there was a hideous stench.
‘Into the gateway! Up the stairs! Quick!’ shouted Gandalf leaping

back. Rousing them from the horror that seemed to have rooted all
but Sam to the ground where they stood, he drove them forward.
They were just in time. Sam and Frodo were only a few steps up,
and Gandalf had just begun to climb, when the groping tentacles
writhed across the narrow shore and ﬁngered the cliff-wall and the
doors. One came wriggling over the threshold, glistening in the star-
light. Gandalf turned and paused. If he was considering what word
would close the gate again from within, there was no need. Many
coiling arms seized the doors on either side, and with horrible
strength, swung them round. With a shattering echo they slammed,
and all light was lost. A noise of rending and crashing came dully
through the ponderous stone.
Sam, clinging to Frodo’s arm, collapsed on a step in the black
darkness. ‘Poor old Bill!’ he said in a choking voice. ‘Poor old Bill!
Wolves and snakes! But the snakes were too much for him. I had to
choose, Mr. Frodo. I had to come with you.’
They heard Gandalf go back down the steps and thrust his staff
against the doors. There was a quiver in the stone and the stairs
trembled, but the doors did not open.
‘Well, well!’ said the wizard. ‘The passage is blocked behind us
now, and there is only one way out – on the other side of the moun-
tains. I fear from the sounds that boulders have been piled up, and
the trees uprooted and thrown across the gate. I am sorry; for the
trees were beautiful, and had stood so long.’
‘I felt that something horrible was near from the moment that my
foot ﬁrst touched the water,’ said Frodo. ‘What was the thing, or
were there many of them?’
‘I do not know,’ answered Gandalf; ‘but the arms were all guided
by one purpose. Something has crept, or has been driven out of dark
waters under the mountains. There are older and fouler things than
Orcs in the deep places of the world.’ He did not speak aloud his
thought that whatever it was that dwelt in the lake, it had seized on
Frodo ﬁrst among all the Company.
Boromir muttered under his breath, but the echoing stone magni-
ﬁed the sound to a hoarse whisper that all could hear: ‘In the deep
places of the world! And thither we are going against my wish. Who
will lead us now in this deadly dark?’
‘I will,’ said Gandalf, ‘and Gimli shall walk with me. Follow my
staff !’
As the wizard passed on ahead up the great steps, he held his staff
aloft, and from its tip there came a faint radiance. The wide stairway
was sound and undamaged. Two hundred steps they counted, broad

and shallow; and at the top they found an arched passage with a level
ﬂoor leading on into the dark.
‘Let us sit and rest and have something to eat, here on the landing,
since we can’t ﬁnd a dining-room!’ said Frodo. He had begun to
shake off the terror of the clutching arm, and suddenly he felt
extremely hungry.
The proposal was welcomed by all; and they sat down on the
upper steps, dim ﬁgures in the gloom. After they had eaten, Gandalf
gave them each a third sip of the miruvor of Rivendell.
‘It will not last much longer, I am afraid,’ he said; ‘but I think we
need it after that horror at the gate. And unless we have great luck,
we shall need all that is left before we see the other side! Go carefully
with the water, too! There are many streams and wells in the Mines,
but they should not be touched. We may not have a chance of ﬁlling
our skins and bottles till we come down into Dimrill Dale.’
‘How long is that going to take us?’ asked Frodo.
‘I cannot say,’ answered Gandalf. ‘It depends on many chances. But
going straight, without mishap or losing our way, we shall take three or
four marches, I expect. It cannot be less than forty miles from West-
door to East-gate in a direct line, and the road may wind much.’
After only a brief rest they started on their way again. All were
eager to get the journey over as quickly as possible, and were willing,
tired as they were, to go on marching still for several hours. Gandalf
walked in front as before. In his left hand he held up his glimmering
staff, the light of which just showed the ground before his feet; in his
right he held his sword Glamdring. Behind him came Gimli, his eyes
glinting in the dim light as he turned his head from side to side.
Behind the dwarf walked Frodo, and he had drawn the short sword,
Sting. No gleam came from the blades of Sting or of Glamdring; and
that was some comfort, for being the work of Elvish smiths in the
Elder Days these swords shone with a cold light, if any Orcs were
near at hand. Behind Frodo went Sam, and after him Legolas, and
the young hobbits, and Boromir. In the dark at the rear, grim and
silent, walked Aragorn.
The passage twisted round a few turns, and then began to descend.
It went steadily down for a long while before it became level once
again. The air grew hot and stiﬂing, but it was not foul, and at
times they felt currents of cooler air upon their faces, issuing from
half-guessed openings in the walls. There were many of these. In the
pale ray of the wizard’s staff, Frodo caught glimpses of stairs and
arches, and of other passages and tunnels, sloping up, or running
steeply down, or opening blankly dark on either side. It was bewilder-
ing beyond hope of remembering.

Gimli aided Gandalf very little, except by his stout courage. At
least he was not, as were most of the others, troubled by the mere
darkness in itself. Often the wizard consulted him at points where
the choice of way was doubtful; but it was always Gandalf who had
the ﬁnal word. The Mines of Moria were vast and intricate beyond the
imagination of Gimli, Glo´in’s son, dwarf of the mountain-race though
he was. To Gandalf the far-off memories of a journey long before were
now of little help, but even in the gloom and despite all windings of
the road he knew whither he wished to go, and he did not falter, as
long as there was a path that led towards his goal.
‘Do not be afraid!’ said Aragorn. There was a pause longer than
usual, and Gandalf and Gimli were whispering together; the others
were crowded behind, waiting anxiously. ‘Do not be afraid! I have
been with him on many a journey, if never on one so dark; and there
are tales in Rivendell of greater deeds of his than any that I have
seen. He will not go astray – if there is any path to ﬁnd. He has led
us in here against our fears, but he will lead us out again, at whatever
cost to himself. He is surer of ﬁnding the way home in a blind night
than the cats of Queen Beru´thiel.’
It was well for the Company that they had such a guide. They had
no fuel nor any means of making torches; in the desperate scramble at
the doors many things had been left behind. But without any light
they would soon have come to grief. There were not only many roads
to choose from, there were also in many places holes and pitfalls,
and dark wells beside the path in which their passing feet echoed.
There were ﬁssures and chasms in the walls and ﬂoor, and every now
and then a crack would open right before their feet. The widest was
more than seven feet across, and it was long before Pippin could
summon enough courage to leap over the dreadful gap. The noise
of churning water came up from far below, as if some great mill-wheel
was turning in the depths.
‘Rope!’ muttered Sam. ‘I knew I’d want it, if I hadn’t got it!’
As these dangers became more frequent their march became
slower. Already they seemed to have been tramping on, on, endlessly
to the mountains’ roots. They were more than weary, and yet there
seemed no comfort in the thought of halting anywhere. Frodo’s spirits
had risen for a while after his escape, and after food and a draught
of the cordial; but now a deep uneasiness, growing to dread, crept
over him again. Though he had been healed in Rivendell of the
knife-stroke, that grim wound had not been without effect. His senses
were sharper and more aware of things that could not be seen. One
sign of change that he soon had noticed was that he could see more

in the dark than any of his companions, save perhaps Gandalf. And
he was in any case the bearer of the Ring: it hung upon its chain
against his breast, and at whiles it seemed a heavy weight. He felt
the certainty of evil ahead and of evil following; but he said nothing.
He gripped tighter on the hilt of his sword and went on doggedly.
The Company behind him spoke seldom, and then only in hurried
whispers. There was no sound but the sound of their own feet: the
dull stump of Gimli’s dwarf-boots; the heavy tread of Boromir; the light
step of Legolas; the soft, scarce-heard patter of hobbit-feet; and in the
rear the slow ﬁrm footfalls of Aragorn with his long stride. When they
halted for a moment they heard nothing at all, unless it were occasion-
ally a faint trickle and drip of unseen water. Yet Frodo began to hear,
or to imagine that he heard, something else: like the faint fall of soft
bare feet. It was never loud enough, or near enough, for him to feel
certain that he heard it; but once it had started it never stopped, while
the Company was moving. But it was not an echo, for when they halted
it pattered on for a little all by itself, and then grew still.
It was after nightfall when they had entered the Mines. They had
been going for several hours with only brief halts, when Gandalf
came to his ﬁrst serious check. Before him stood a wide dark arch
opening into three passages: all led in the same general direction,
eastwards; but the left-hand passage plunged down, while the right-
hand climbed up, and the middle way seemed to run on, smooth
and level but very narrow.
‘I have no memory of this place at all!’ said Gandalf, standing
uncertainly under the arch. He held up his staff in the hope of ﬁnding
some marks or inscription that might help his choice; but nothing of
the kind was to be seen. ‘I am too weary to decide,’ he said, shaking
his head. ‘And I expect that you are all as weary as I am, or wearier.
We had better halt here for what is left of the night. You know what
I mean! In here it is ever dark; but outside the late Moon is riding
westward and the middle-night has passed.’
‘Poor old Bill!’ said Sam. ‘I wonder where he is. I hope those
wolves haven’t got him yet.’
To the left of the great arch they found a stone door: it was half
closed, but swung back easily to a gentle thrust. Beyond there seemed
to lie a wide chamber cut in the rock.
‘Steady! Steady!’ cried Gandalf, as Merry and Pippin pushed for-
ward, glad to ﬁnd a place where they could rest with at least more
feeling of shelter than in the open passage. ‘Steady! You do not know
what is inside yet. I will go ﬁrst.’
He went in cautiously, and the others ﬁled behind. ‘There!’ he
said, pointing with his staff to the middle of the ﬂoor. Before his feet

they saw a large round hole like the mouth of a well. Broken and
rusty chains lay at the edge and trailed down into the black pit.
Fragments of stone lay near.
‘One of you might have fallen in and still be wondering when you
were going to strike the bottom,’ said Aragorn to Merry. ‘Let the
guide go ﬁrst while you have one.’
‘This seems to have been a guardroom, made for the watching of
the three passages,’ said Gimli. ‘That hole was plainly a well for the
guards’ use, covered with a stone lid. But the lid is broken, and we
must all take care in the dark.’
Pippin felt curiously attracted by the well. While the others were
unrolling blankets and making beds against the walls of the chamber,
as far as possible from the hole in the ﬂoor, he crept to the edge and
peered over. A chill air seemed to strike his face, rising from invisible
depths. Moved by a sudden impulse he groped for a loose stone, and
let it drop. He felt his heart beat many times before there was any
sound. Then far below, as if the stone had fallen into deep water in
some cavernous place, there came a plunk, very distant, but magniﬁed
and repeated in the hollow shaft.
‘What’s that?’ cried Gandalf. He was relieved when Pippin con-
fessed what he had done; but he was angry, and Pippin could see his
eye glinting. ‘Fool of a Took!’ he growled. ‘This is a serious journey,
not a hobbit walking-party. Throw yourself in next time, and then
you will be no further nuisance. Now be quiet!’
Nothing more was heard for several minutes; but then there came
out of the depths faint knocks: tom-tap, tap-tom. They stopped, and
when the echoes had died away, they were repeated: tap-tom, tom-tap,
tap-tap, tom. They sounded disquietingly like signals of some sort;
but after a while the knocking died away and was not heard again.
‘That was the sound of a hammer, or I have never heard one,’
said Gimli.
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf, ‘and I do not like it. It may have nothing to
do with Peregrin’s foolish stone; but probably something has been
disturbed that would have been better left quiet. Pray, do nothing of
the kind again! Let us hope we shall get some rest without further
trouble. You, Pippin, can go on the ﬁrst watch, as a reward,’ he
growled, as he rolled himself in a blanket.
Pippin sat miserably by the door in the pitch dark; but he kept on
turning round, fearing that some unknown thing would crawl up out
of the well. He wished he could cover the hole, if only with a blanket,
but he dared not move or go near it, even though Gandalf seemed
to be asleep.
Actually Gandalf was awake, though lying still and silent. He was
deep in thought, trying to recall every memory of his former journey

in the Mines, and considering anxiously the next course that he
should take; a false turn now might be disastrous. After an hour he
rose up and came over to Pippin.
‘Get into a corner and have a sleep, my lad,’ he said in a kindly
tone. ‘You want to sleep, I expect. I cannot get a wink, so I may as
well do the watching.’
‘I know what is the matter with me,’ he muttered, as he sat down
by the door. ‘I need smoke! I have not tasted it since the morning
before the snowstorm.’
The last thing that Pippin saw, as sleep took him, was a dark
glimpse of the old wizard huddled on the ﬂoor, shielding a glowing
chip in his gnarled hands between his knees. The ﬂicker for a moment
showed his sharp nose, and the puff of smoke.
It was Gandalf who roused them all from sleep. He had sat and
watched all alone for about six hours, and had let the others rest.
‘And in the watches I have made up my mind,’ he said. ‘I do not
like the feel of the middle way; and I do not like the smell of the
left-hand way: there is foul air down there, or I am no guide. I shall
take the right-hand passage. It is time we began to climb up again.’
For eight dark hours, not counting two brief halts, they marched
on; and they met no danger, and heard nothing, and saw nothing but
the faint gleam of the wizard’s light, bobbing like a will-o’-the-wisp in
front of them. The passage they had chosen wound steadily upwards.
As far as they could judge it went in great mounting curves, and as
it rose it grew loftier and wider. There were now no openings to
other galleries or tunnels on either side, and the ﬂoor was level and
sound, without pits or cracks. Evidently they had struck what once
had been an important road; and they went forward quicker than
they had done on their ﬁrst march.
In this way they advanced some ﬁfteen miles, measured in a direct
line east, though they must have actually walked twenty miles or
more. As the road climbed upwards, Frodo’s spirits rose a little; but
he still felt oppressed, and still at times he heard, or thought he heard,
away behind the Company and beyond the fall and patter of their
feet, a following footstep that was not an echo.
They had marched as far as the hobbits could endure without a rest,
and all were thinking of a place where they could sleep, when suddenly
the walls to right and left vanished. They seemed to have passed
through some arched doorway into a black and empty space. There
was a great draught of warmer air behind them, and before them the
darkness was cold on their faces. They halted and crowded anxiously
together.

Gandalf seemed pleased. ‘I chose the right way,’ he said. ‘At last
we are coming to the habitable parts, and I guess that we are not far
now from the eastern side. But we are high up, a good deal higher
than the Dimrill Gate, unless I am mistaken. From the feeling of the
air we must be in a wide hall. I will now risk a little real light.’
He raised his staff, and for a brief instant there was a blaze like a
ﬂash of lightning. Great shadows sprang up and ﬂed, and for a second
they saw a vast roof far above their heads upheld by many mighty pillars
hewn of stone. Before them and on either side stretched a huge empty
hall; its black walls, polished and smooth as glass, ﬂashed and glittered.
Three other entrances they saw, dark black arches: one straight before
them eastwards, and one on either side. Then the light went out.
‘That is all that I shall venture on for the present,’ said Gandalf.
‘There used to be great windows on the mountain-side, and shafts
leading out to the light in the upper reaches of the Mines. I think
we have reached them now, but it is night outside again, and we
cannot tell until morning. If I am right, tomorrow we may actually
see the morning peeping in. But in the meanwhile we had better go
no further. Let us rest, if we can. Things have gone well so far, and
the greater part of the dark road is over. But we are not through yet,
and it is a long way down to the Gates that open on the world.’
The Company spent that night in the great cavernous hall, huddled
close together in a corner to escape the draught: there seemed to be
a steady inﬂow of chill air through the eastern archway. All about
them as they lay hung the darkness, hollow and immense, and they
were oppressed by the loneliness and vastness of the dolven halls and
endlessly branching stairs and passages. The wildest imaginings that
dark rumour had ever suggested to the hobbits fell altogether short
of the actual dread and wonder of Moria.
‘There must have been a mighty crowd of dwarves here at one
time,’ said Sam; ‘and every one of them busier than badgers for ﬁve
hundred years to make all this, and most in hard rock too! What did
they do it all for? They didn’t live in these darksome holes surely?’
‘These are not holes,’ said Gimli. ‘This is the great realm and city
of the Dwarrowdelf. And of old it was not darksome, but full of light
and splendour, as is still remembered in our songs.’
He rose and standing in the dark he began to chant in a deep
voice, while the echoes ran away into the roof.
The world was young, the mountains green,
No stain yet on the Moon was seen,
No words were laid on stream or stone
When Durin woke and walked alone.

He named the nameless hills and dells;
He drank from yet untasted wells;
He stooped and looked in Mirrormere,
And saw a crown of stars appear,
As gems upon a silver thread,
Above the shadow of his head.
The world was fair, the mountains tall,
In Elder Days before the fall
Of mighty kings in Nargothrond
And Gondolin, who now beyond
The Western Seas have passed away:
The world was fair in Durin’s Day.
A king he was on carven throne
In many-pillared halls of stone
With golden roof and silver ﬂoor,
And runes of power upon the door.
The light of sun and star and moon
In shining lamps of crystal hewn
Undimmed by cloud or shade of night
There shone for ever fair and bright.
There hammer on the anvil smote,
There chisel clove, and graver wrote;
There forged was blade, and bound was hilt;
The delver mined, the mason built.
There beryl, pearl, and opal pale,
And metal wrought like ﬁshes’ mail,
Buckler and corslet, axe and sword,
And shining spears were laid in hoard.
Unwearied then were Durin’s folk;
Beneath the mountains music woke:
The harpers harped, the minstrels sang,
And at the gates the trumpets rang.
The world is grey, the mountains old,
The forge’s ﬁre is ashen-cold;
No harp is wrung, no hammer falls:
The darkness dwells in Durin’s halls;
The shadow lies upon his tomb
In Moria, in Khazad-duˆ m.

But still the sunken stars appear
In dark and windless Mirrormere;
There lies his crown in water deep,
Till Durin wakes again from sleep.
‘I like that!’ said Sam. ‘I should like to learn it. In Moria, in
Khazad-duˆm! But it makes the darkness seem heavier, thinking of all
those lamps. Are there piles of jewels and gold lying about here still?’
Gimli was silent. Having sung his song he would say no more.
‘Piles of jewels?’ said Gandalf. ‘No. The Orcs have often plundered
Moria; there is nothing left in the upper halls. And since the dwarves
ﬂed, no one dares to seek the shafts and treasuries down in the deep
places: they are drowned in water – or in a shadow of fear.’
‘Then what do the dwarves want to come back for?’ asked Sam.
‘For mithril,’ answered Gandalf. ‘The wealth of Moria was not in
gold and jewels, the toys of the Dwarves; nor in iron, their servant.
Such things they found here, it is true, especially iron; but they did
not need to delve for them: all things that they desired they could
obtain in trafﬁc. For here alone in the world was found Moria-silver,
or true-silver as some have called it: mithril is the Elvish name. The
Dwarves have a name which they do not tell. Its worth was ten times
that of gold, and now it is beyond price; for little is left above ground,
and even the Orcs dare not delve here for it. The lodes lead away
north towards Caradhras, and down to darkness. The Dwarves tell
no tale; but even as mithril was the foundation of their wealth, so
also it was their destruction: they delved too greedily and too deep,
and disturbed that from which they ﬂed, Durin’s Bane. Of what they
brought to light the Orcs have gathered nearly all, and given it in
tribute to Sauron, who covets it.
‘Mithril! All folk desired it. It could be beaten like copper, and
polished like glass; and the Dwarves could make of it a metal, light
and yet harder than tempered steel. Its beauty was like to that of
common silver, but the beauty of mithril did not tarnish or grow dim.
The Elves dearly loved it, and among many uses they made of it
ithildin, starmoon, which you saw upon the doors. Bilbo had a corslet
of mithril-rings that Thorin gave him. I wonder what has become of
it? Gathering dust still in Michel Delving Mathom-house, I suppose.’
‘What?’ cried Gimli, startled out of his silence. ‘A corslet of Moria-
silver? That was a kingly gift!’
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘I never told him, but its worth was greater
than the value of the whole Shire and everything in it.’
Frodo said nothing, but he put his hand under his tunic and
touched the rings of his mail-shirt. He felt staggered to think that he
had been walking about with the price of the Shire under his jacket.

Had Bilbo known? He felt no doubt that Bilbo knew quite well. It
was indeed a kingly gift. But now his thoughts had been carried away
from the dark Mines, to Rivendell, to Bilbo, and to Bag End in the
days while Bilbo was still there. He wished with all his heart that he
was back there, and in those days, mowing the lawn, or pottering
among the ﬂowers, and that he had never heard of Moria, or mithril
– or the Ring.
A deep silence fell. One by one the others fell asleep. Frodo was
on guard. As if it were a breath that came in through unseen doors
out of deep places, dread came over him. His hands were cold and
his brow damp. He listened. All his mind was given to listening and
nothing else for two slow hours; but he heard no sound, not even
the imagined echo of a footfall.
His watch was nearly over, when, far off where he guessed that
the western archway stood, he fancied that he could see two pale
points of light, almost like luminous eyes. He started. His head had
nodded. ‘I must have nearly fallen asleep on guard,’ he thought. ‘I
was on the edge of a dream.’ He stood up and rubbed his eyes, and
remained standing, peering into the dark, until he was relieved by
Legolas.
When he lay down he quickly went to sleep, but it seemed to him
that the dream went on: he heard whispers, and saw the two pale
points of light approaching, slowly. He woke and found that the
others were speaking softly near him, and that a dim light was falling
on his face. High up above the eastern archway through a shaft near
the roof came a long pale gleam; and across the hall through the
northern arch light also glimmered faint and distantly.
Frodo sat up. ‘Good morning!’ said Gandalf. ‘For morning it is
again at last. I was right, you see. We are high up on the east side
of Moria. Before today is over we ought to ﬁnd the Great Gates and
see the waters of Mirrormere lying in the Dimrill Dale before us.’
‘I shall be glad,’ said Gimli. ‘I have looked on Moria, and it is
very great, but it has become dark and dreadful; and we have found
no sign of my kindred. I doubt now that Balin ever came here.’
After they had breakfasted Gandalf decided to go on again at once.
‘We are tired, but we shall rest better when we are outside,’ he said.
‘I think that none of us will wish to spend another night in
Moria.’
‘No indeed!’ said Boromir. ‘Which way shall we take? Yonder
eastward arch?’
‘Maybe,’ said Gandalf. ‘But I do not know yet exactly where we
are. Unless I am quite astray, I guess that we are above and to the

north of the Great Gates; and it may not be easy to ﬁnd the right
road down to them. The eastern arch will probably prove to be the
way that we must take; but before we make up our minds we ought
to look about us. Let us go towards that light in the north door. If
we could ﬁnd a window it would help, but I fear that the light comes
only down deep shafts.’
Following his lead the Company passed under the northern arch.
They found themselves in a wide corridor. As they went along it the
glimmer grew stronger, and they saw that it came through a doorway
on their right. It was high and ﬂat-topped, and the stone door was
still upon its hinges, standing half open. Beyond it was a large square
chamber. It was dimly lit, but to their eyes, after so long a time in
the dark, it seemed dazzlingly bright, and they blinked as they entered.
Their feet disturbed a deep dust upon the ﬂoor, and stumbled
among things lying in the doorway whose shapes they could not at
ﬁrst make out. The chamber was lit by a wide shaft high in the further
eastern wall; it slanted upwards and, far above, a small square patch
of blue sky could be seen. The light of the shaft fell directly on a
table in the middle of the room: a single oblong block, about two
feet high, upon which was laid a great slab of white stone.
‘It looks like a tomb,’ muttered Frodo, and bent forwards with a
curious sense of foreboding, to look more closely at it. Gandalf came
quickly to his side. On the slab runes were deeply graven:

‘These are Daeron’s Runes, such as were used of old in Moria,’
said Gandalf. ‘Here is written in the tongues of Men and Dwarves:
balin son of fundin
lord of moria.’
‘He is dead then,’ said Frodo. ‘I feared it was so.’ Gimli cast his
hood over his face.

Chapter 5
ˆ M
T H E  B R I D G E  O F  K H A Z A D - D U
The Company of the Ring stood silent beside the tomb of Balin.
Frodo thought of Bilbo and his long friendship with the dwarf, and
of Balin’s visit to the Shire long ago. In that dusty chamber in the
mountains it seemed a thousand years ago and on the other side of
the world.
At length they stirred and looked up, and began to search for
anything that would give them tidings of Balin’s fate, or show what
had become of his folk. There was another smaller door on the other
side of the chamber, under the shaft. By both the doors they could
now see that many bones were lying, and among them were broken
swords and axe-heads, and cloven shields and helms. Some of the
swords were crooked: orc-scimitars with blackened blades.
There were many recesses cut in the rock of the walls, and in them
were large iron-bound chests of wood. All had been broken and
plundered; but beside the shattered lid of one there lay the remains
of a book. It had been slashed and stabbed and partly burned, and
it was so stained with black and other dark marks like old blood that
little of it could be read. Gandalf lifted it carefully, but the leaves
cracked and broke as he laid it on the slab. He pored over it for some
time without speaking. Frodo and Gimli standing at his side could
see, as he gingerly turned the leaves, that they were written by many
different hands, in runes, both of Moria and of Dale, and here and
there in Elvish script.
At last Gandalf looked up. ‘It seems to be a record of the fortunes
of Balin’s folk,’ he said. ‘I guess that it began with their coming to
Dimrill Dale nigh on thirty years ago: the pages seem to have numbers
referring to the years after their arrival. The top page is marked one
– three, so at least two are missing from the beginning. Listen to this!
‘We drove out orcs from the great gate and guard – I think; the next
word is blurred and burned: probably room – we slew many in the
bright – I think – sun in the dale. Flo´i was killed by an arrow. He slew
the great. Then there is a blur followed by Flo´i under grass near Mirror
mere. The next line or two I cannot read. Then comes We have taken
the twentyﬁrst hall of North end to dwell in. There is I cannot read what.
A shaft is mentioned. Then Balin has set up his seat in the Chamber of
Mazarbul.’
‘The Chamber of Records,’ said Gimli. ‘I guess that is where we
now stand.’

‘Well, I can read no more for a long way,’ said Gandalf, ‘except
the word gold, and Durin’s Axe and something helm. Then Balin is
now lord of Moria. That seems to end a chapter. After some stars
another hand begins, and I can see we found truesilver, and later the
word wellforged, and then something, I have it! mithril; and the last
´
two lines Oin to seek for the upper armouries of Third Deep, something
go westwards, a blur, to Hollin gate.’
Gandalf paused and set a few leaves aside. ‘There are several pages
of the same sort, rather hastily written and much damaged,’ he said;
‘but I can make little of them in this light. Now there must be a
number of leaves missing, because they begin to be numbered ﬁve,
the ﬁfth year of the colony, I suppose. Let me see! No, they are too
cut and stained; I cannot read them. We might do better in the
sunlight. Wait! Here is something: a large bold hand using an Elvish
script.’
‘That would be Ori’s hand,’ said Gimli, looking over the wizard’s
arm. ‘He could write well and speedily, and often used the Elvish
characters.’
‘I fear he had ill tidings to record in a fair hand,’ said Gandalf.
‘The ﬁrst clear word is sorrow, but the rest of the line is lost, unless
it ends in estre. Yes, it must be yestre followed by day being the tenth
of novembre Balin lord of Moria fell in Dimrill Dale. He went alone to
look in Mirror mere. an orc shot him from behind a stone. we slew the orc,
but many more ... up from east up the Silverlode. The remainder of the
page is so blurred that I can hardly make anything out, but I think
I can read we have barred the gates, and then can hold them long if,
and then perhaps horrible and suffer. Poor Balin! He seems to have
kept the title that he took for less than ﬁve years. I wonder what
happened afterwards; but there is no time to puzzle out the last few
pages. Here is the last page of all.’ He paused and sighed.
‘It is grim reading,’ he said. ‘I fear their end was cruel. Listen! We
cannot get out. We cannot get out. They have taken the Bridge and second
hall. Fra´r and Lo´ni and Na´li fell there. Then there are four lines
smeared so that I can only read went 5 days ago. The last lines run
the pool is up to the wall at Westgate. The Watcher in the Water took
´
Oin. We cannot get out. The end comes, and then drums, drums in the
deep. I wonder what that means. The last thing written is in a trailing
scrawl of elf-letters: they are coming. There is nothing more.’ Gandalf
paused and stood in silent thought.
A sudden dread and a horror of the chamber fell on the Company.
‘We cannot get out,’ muttered Gimli. ‘It was well for us that the pool
had sunk a little, and that the Watcher was sleeping down at the
southern end.’

Gandalf raised his head and looked round. ‘They seem to have
made a last stand by both doors,’ he said; ‘but there were not many
left by that time. So ended the attempt to retake Moria! It was valiant
but foolish. The time is not come yet. Now, I fear, we must say
farewell to Balin son of Fundin. Here he must lie in the halls of his
fathers. We will take this book, the Book of Mazarbul, and look at
it more closely later. You had better keep it, Gimli, and take it back
to Da´in, if you get a chance. It will interest him, though it will grieve
him deeply. Come, let us go! The morning is passing.’
‘Which way shall we go?’ asked Boromir.
‘Back to the hall,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But our visit to this room
has not been in vain. I now know where we are. This must be, as
Gimli says, the Chamber of Mazarbul; and the hall must be the
twenty-ﬁrst of the North-end. Therefore we should leave by the
eastern arch of the hall, and bear right and south, and go downwards.
The Twenty-ﬁrst Hall should be on the Seventh Level, that is six
above the level of the Gates. Come now! Back to the hall!’
Gandalf had hardly spoken these words, when there came a great
noise: a rolling Boom that seemed to come from depths far below,
and to tremble in the stone at their feet. They sprang towards the
door in alarm. Doom, doom it rolled again, as if huge hands were
turning the very caverns of Moria into a vast drum. Then there came
an echoing blast: a great horn was blown in the hall, and answering
horns and harsh cries were heard further off. There was a hurrying
sound of many feet.
‘They are coming!’ cried Legolas.
‘We cannot get out,’ said Gimli.
‘Trapped!’ cried Gandalf. ‘Why did I delay? Here we are, caught,
just as they were before. But I was not here then. We will see
what——’
Doom, doom came the drum-beat and the walls shook.
‘Slam the doors and wedge them!’ shouted Aragorn. ‘And keep
your packs on as long as you can: we may get a chance to cut our
way out yet.’
‘No!’ said Gandalf. ‘We must not get shut in. Keep the east door
ajar! We will go that way, if we get a chance.’
Another harsh horn-call and shrill cries rang out. Feet were coming
down the corridor. There was a ring and clatter as the Company
drew their swords. Glamdring shone with a pale light, and Sting
glinted at the edges. Boromir set his shoulder against the western
door.
‘Wait a moment! Do not close it yet!’ said Gandalf. He sprang
forward to Boromir’s side and drew himself up to his full height.

‘Who comes hither to disturb the rest of Balin Lord of Moria?’ he
cried in a loud voice.
There was a rush of hoarse laughter, like the fall of sliding stones
into a pit; amid the clamour a deep voice was raised in command.
Doom, boom, doom went the drums in the deep.
With a quick movement Gandalf stepped before the narrow open-
ing of the door and thrust forward his staff. There was a dazzling
ﬂash that lit the chamber and the passage outside. For an instant the
wizard looked out. Arrows whined and whistled down the corridor
as he sprang back.
‘There are Orcs, very many of them,’ he said. ‘And some are large
and evil: black Uruks of Mordor. For the moment they are hanging
back, but there is something else there. A great cave-troll, I think,
or more than one. There is no hope of escape that way.’
‘And no hope at all, if they come at the other door as well,’ said
Boromir.
‘There is no sound outside here yet,’ said Aragorn, who was stand-
ing by the eastern door listening. ‘The passage on this side plunges
straight down a stair: it plainly does not lead back towards the hall.
But it is no good ﬂying blindly this way with the pursuit just behind.
We cannot block the door. Its key is gone and the lock is broken,
and it opens inwards. We must do something to delay the enemy
ﬁrst. We will make them fear the Chamber of Mazarbul!’ he said
grimly, feeling the edge of his sword, Andu´ril.
Heavy feet were heard in the corridor. Boromir ﬂung himself
against the door and heaved it to; then he wedged it with broken
sword-blades and splinters of wood. The Company retreated to the
other side of the chamber. But they had no chance to ﬂy yet. There
was a blow on the door that made it quiver; and then it began to
grind slowly open, driving back the wedges. A huge arm and shoulder,
with a dark skin of greenish scales, was thrust through the widening
gap. Then a great, ﬂat, toeless foot was forced through below. There
was a dead silence outside.
Boromir leaped forward and hewed at the arm with all his might;
but his sword rang, glanced aside, and fell from his shaken hand.
The blade was notched.
Suddenly, and to his own surprise, Frodo felt a hot wrath blaze
up in his heart. ‘The Shire!’ he cried, and springing beside Boromir,
he stooped, and stabbed with Sting at the hideous foot. There was
a bellow, and the foot jerked back, nearly wrenching Sting from
Frodo’s arm. Black drops dripped from the blade and smoked on
the ﬂoor. Boromir hurled himself against the door and slammed it
again.

‘One for the Shire!’ cried Aragorn. ‘The hobbit’s bite is deep! You
have a good blade, Frodo son of Drogo!’
There was a crash on the door, followed by crash after crash. Rams
and hammers were beating against it. It cracked and staggered back,
and the opening grew suddenly wide. Arrows came whistling in, but
struck the northern wall, and fell harmlessly to the ﬂoor. There was
a horn-blast and a rush of feet, and orcs one after another leaped
into the chamber.
How many there were the Company could not count. The affray
was sharp, but the orcs were dismayed by the ﬁerceness of the
defence. Legolas shot two through the throat. Gimli hewed the legs
from under another that had sprung up on Balin’s tomb. Boromir and
Aragorn slew many. When thirteen had fallen the rest ﬂed shrieking,
leaving the defenders unharmed, except for Sam who had a scratch
along the scalp. A quick duck had saved him; and he had felled his
orc: a sturdy thrust with his Barrow-blade. A ﬁre was smouldering
in his brown eyes that would have made Ted Sandyman step back-
wards, if he had seen it.
‘Now is the time!’ cried Gandalf. ‘Let us go, before the troll
returns!’
But even as they retreated, and before Pippin and Merry had
reached the stair outside, a huge orc-chieftain, almost man-high, clad
in black mail from head to foot, leaped into the chamber; behind
him his followers clustered in the doorway. His broad ﬂat face was
swart, his eyes were like coals, and his tongue was red; he wielded a
great spear. With a thrust of his huge hide shield he turned Boromir’s
sword and bore him backwards, throwing him to the ground. Diving
under Aragorn’s blow with the speed of a striking snake he charged
into the Company and thrust with his spear straight at Frodo. The
blow caught him on the right side, and Frodo was hurled against the
wall and pinned. Sam, with a cry, hacked at the spear-shaft, and it
broke. But even as the orc ﬂung down the truncheon and swept out
his scimitar, Andu´ril came down upon his helm. There was a ﬂash
like ﬂame and the helm burst asunder. The orc fell with cloven
head. His followers ﬂed howling, as Boromir and Aragorn sprang at
them.
Doom, doom went the drums in the deep. The great voice rolled
out again.
‘Now!’ shouted Gandalf. ‘Now is the last chance. Run for it!’
Aragorn picked up Frodo where he lay by the wall and made for
the stair, pushing Merry and Pippin in front of him. The others
followed; but Gimli had to be dragged away by Legolas: in spite of
the peril he lingered by Balin’s tomb with his head bowed. Boromir

hauled the eastern door to, grinding upon its hinges: it had great iron
rings on either side, but could not be fastened.
‘I am all right,’ gasped Frodo. ‘I can walk. Put me down!’
Aragorn nearly dropped him in his amazement. ‘I thought you
were dead!’ he cried.
‘Not yet!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is no time for wonder. Off you
go, all of you, down the stairs! Wait a few minutes for me at the
bottom, but if I do not come soon, go on! Go quickly and choose
paths leading right and downwards.’
‘We cannot leave you to hold the door alone!’ said Aragorn.
‘Do as I say!’ said Gandalf ﬁercely. ‘Swords are no more use here.
Go!’
The passage was lit by no shaft and was utterly dark. They groped
their way down a long ﬂight of steps, and then looked back; but they
could see nothing, except high above them the faint glimmer of the
wizard’s staff. He seemed to be still standing on guard by the closed
door. Frodo breathed heavily and leaned against Sam, who put his
arms about him. They stood peering up the stairs into the darkness.
Frodo thought he could hear the voice of Gandalf above, muttering
words that ran down the sloping roof with a sighing echo. He could
not catch what was said. The walls seemed to be trembling. Every
now and again the drum-beats throbbed and rolled: doom, doom.
Suddenly at the top of the stair there was a stab of white light.
Then there was a dull rumble and a heavy thud. The drum-beats
broke out wildly: doom-boom, doom-boom, and then stopped. Gandalf
came ﬂying down the steps and fell to the ground in the midst of the
Company.
‘Well, well! That’s over!’ said the wizard struggling to his feet. ‘I
have done all that I could. But I have met my match, and have nearly
been destroyed. But don’t stand here! Go on! You will have to do
without light for a while: I am rather shaken. Go on! Go on! Where
are you, Gimli? Come ahead with me! Keep close behind, all of you!’
They stumbled after him wondering what had happened. Doom,
doom went the drum-beats again: they now sounded mufﬂed and far
away, but they were following. There was no other sound of pursuit,
neither tramp of feet, nor any voice. Gandalf took no turns, right or
left, for the passage seemed to be going in the direction that he
desired. Every now and again it descended a ﬂight of steps, ﬁfty or
more, to a lower level. At the moment that was their chief danger;
for in the dark they could not see a descent, until they came on it
and put their feet out into emptiness. Gandalf felt the ground with
his staff like a blind man.

At the end of an hour they had gone a mile, or maybe a little
more, and had descended many ﬂights of stairs. There was still no
sound of pursuit. Almost they began to hope that they would escape.
At the bottom of the seventh ﬂight Gandalf halted.
‘It is getting hot!’ he gasped. ‘We ought to be down at least to the
level of the Gates now. Soon I think we should look for a left-hand
turn to take us east. I hope it is not far. I am very weary. I must rest
here a moment, even if all the orcs ever spawned are after us.’
Gimli took his arm and helped him down to a seat on the step.
‘What happened away up there at the door?’ he asked. ‘Did you meet
the beater of the drums?’
‘I do not know,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But I found myself suddenly
faced by something that I have not met before. I could think of
nothing to do but to try and put a shutting-spell on the door. I know
many; but to do things of that kind rightly requires time, and even
then the door can be broken by strength.
‘As I stood there I could hear orc-voices on the other side: at any
moment I thought they would burst it open. I could not hear what
was said; they seemed to be talking in their own hideous language.
All I caught was ghaˆ sh: that is ‘‘ﬁre’’. Then something came into the
chamber – I felt it through the door, and the orcs themselves were
afraid and fell silent. It laid hold of the iron ring, and then it perceived
me and my spell.
‘What it was I cannot guess, but I have never felt such a challenge.
The counter-spell was terrible. It nearly broke me. For an instant the
door left my control and began to open! I had to speak a word of
Command. That proved too great a strain. The door burst in pieces.
Something dark as a cloud was blocking out all the light inside, and
I was thrown backwards down the stairs. All the wall gave way, and
the roof of the chamber as well, I think.
‘I am afraid Balin is buried deep, and maybe something else is
buried there too. I cannot say. But at least the passage behind us
was completely blocked. Ah! I have never felt so spent, but it is
passing. And now what about you, Frodo? There was not time to
say so, but I have never been more delighted in my life than when
you spoke. I feared that it was a brave but dead hobbit that Aragorn
was carrying.’
‘What about me?’ said Frodo. ‘I am alive, and whole I think. I am
bruised and in pain, but it is not too bad.’
‘Well,’ said Aragorn, ‘I can only say that hobbits are made of a
stuff so tough that I have never met the like of it. Had I known, I
would have spoken softer in the Inn at Bree! That spear-thrust would
have skewered a wild boar!’
‘Well, it did not skewer me, I am glad to say,’ said Frodo; ‘though

I feel as if I had been caught between a hammer and an anvil.’ He
said no more. He found breathing painful.
‘You take after Bilbo,’ said Gandalf. ‘There is more about you
than meets the eye, as I said of him long ago.’ Frodo wondered if
the remark meant more than it said.
They now went on again. Before long Gimli spoke. He had keen
eyes in the dark. ‘I think,’ he said, ‘that there is a light ahead. But it
is not daylight. It is red. What can it be?’
‘Ghaˆsh!’ muttered Gandalf. ‘I wonder if that is what they meant:
that the lower levels are on ﬁre? Still, we can only go on.’
Soon the light became unmistakable, and could be seen by all. It
was ﬂickering and glowing on the walls away down the passage before
them. They could now see their way: in front the road sloped down
swiftly, and some way ahead there stood a low archway; through it
the growing light came. The air became very hot.
When they came to the arch Gandalf went through, signing to
them to wait. As he stood just beyond the opening they saw his face
lit by a red glow. Quickly he stepped back.
‘There is some new devilry here,’ he said, ‘devised for our welcome,
no doubt. But I know now where we are: we have reached the First
Deep, the level immediately below the Gates. This is the Second
Hall of Old Moria; and the Gates are near: away beyond the eastern
end, on the left, not more than a quarter of a mile. Across the Bridge,
up a broad stair, along a wide road, through the First Hall, and out!
But come and look!’
They peered out. Before them was another cavernous hall. It was
loftier and far longer than the one in which they had slept. They
were near its eastern end; westward it ran away into darkness. Down
the centre stalked a double line of towering pillars. They were carved
like boles of mighty trees whose boughs upheld the roof with a branch-
ing tracery of stone. Their stems were smooth and black, but a red
glow was darkly mirrored in their sides. Right across the ﬂoor, close
to the feet of two huge pillars a great ﬁssure had opened. Out of it
a ﬁerce red light came, and now and again ﬂames licked at the brink
and curled about the bases of the columns. Wisps of dark smoke
wavered in the hot air.
‘If we had come by the main road down from the upper halls, we
should have been trapped here,’ said Gandalf. ‘Let us hope that the ﬁre
now lies between us and pursuit. Come! There is no time to lose.’
Even as he spoke they heard again the pursuing drum-beat: Doom,
doom, doom. Away beyond the shadows at the western end of the hall
there came cries and horn-calls. Doom, doom: the pillars seemed to
tremble and the ﬂames to quiver.

‘Now for the last race!’ said Gandalf. ‘If the sun is shining outside,
we may still escape. After me!’
He turned left and sped across the smooth ﬂoor of the hall. The
distance was greater than it had looked. As they ran they heard the
beat and echo of many hurrying feet behind. A shrill yell went up:
they had been seen. There was a ring and clash of steel. An arrow
whistled over Frodo’s head.
Boromir laughed. ‘They did not expect this,’ he said. ‘The ﬁre
has cut them off. We are on the wrong side!’
‘Look ahead!’ called Gandalf. ‘The Bridge is near. lt is dangerous
and narrow.’
Suddenly Frodo saw before him a black chasm. At the end of the
hall the ﬂoor vanished and fell to an unknown depth. The outer door
could only be reached by a slender bridge of stone, without kerb or
rail, that spanned the chasm with one curving spring of ﬁfty feet. It
was an ancient defence of the Dwarves against any enemy that might
capture the First Hall and the outer passages. They could only pass
across it in single ﬁle. At the brink Gandalf halted and the others
came up in a pack behind.
‘Lead the way, Gimli!’ he said. ‘Pippin and Merry next. Straight
on, and up the stair beyond the door!’
Arrows fell among them. One struck Frodo and sprang back.
Another pierced Gandalf ’s hat and stuck there like a black feather.
Frodo looked behind. Beyond the ﬁre he saw swarming black ﬁgures:
there seemed to be hundreds of orcs. They brandished spears and
scimitars which shone red as blood in the ﬁrelight. Doom, doom rolled
the drum-beats, growing louder and louder, doom, doom.
Legolas turned and set an arrow to the string, though it was a long
shot for his small bow. He drew, but his hand fell, and the arrow
slipped to the ground. He gave a cry of dismay and fear. Two great
trolls appeared; they bore great slabs of stone, and ﬂung them down
to serve as gangways over the ﬁre. But it was not the trolls that had
ﬁlled the Elf with terror. The ranks of the orcs had opened, and they
crowded away, as if they themselves were afraid. Something was
coming up behind them. What it was could not be seen: it was like
a great shadow, in the middle of which was a dark form, of man-shape
maybe, yet greater; and a power and terror seemed to be in it and
to go before it.
It came to the edge of the ﬁre and the light faded as if a cloud
had bent over it. Then with a rush it leaped across the ﬁssure. The
ﬂames roared up to greet it, and wreathed about it; and a black smoke
swirled in the air. Its streaming mane kindled, and blazed behind it.
In its right hand was a blade like a stabbing tongue of ﬁre; in its left
it held a whip of many thongs.

‘Ai! ai!’ wailed Legolas. ‘A Balrog! A Balrog is come!’
Gimli stared with wide eyes. ‘Durin’s Bane!’ he cried, and letting
his axe fall he covered his face.
‘A Balrog,’ muttered Gandalf. ‘Now I understand.’ He faltered
and leaned heavily on his staff. ‘What an evil fortune! And I am
already weary.’
The dark ﬁgure streaming with ﬁre raced towards them. The orcs
yelled and poured over the stone gangways. Then Boromir raised his
horn and blew. Loud the challenge rang and bellowed, like the shout
of many throats under the cavernous roof. For a moment the orcs
quailed and the ﬁery shadow halted. Then the echoes died as sud-
denly as a ﬂame blown out by a dark wind, and the enemy advanced
again.
‘Over the bridge!’ cried Gandalf, recalling his strength. ‘Fly! This
is a foe beyond any of you. I must hold the narrow way. Fly!’ Aragorn
and Boromir did not heed the command, but still held their ground,
side by side, behind Gandalf at the far end of the bridge. The others
halted just within the doorway at the hall’s end, and turned, unable
to leave their leader to face the enemy alone.
The Balrog reached the bridge. Gandalf stood in the middle of
the span, leaning on the staff in his left hand, but in his other hand
Glamdring gleamed, cold and white. His enemy halted again, facing
him, and the shadow about it reached out like two vast wings. It
raised the whip, and the thongs whined and cracked. Fire came from
its nostrils. But Gandalf stood ﬁrm.
‘You cannot pass,’ he said. The orcs stood still, and a dead silence
fell. ‘I am a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the ﬂame of Anor.
You cannot pass. The dark ﬁre will not avail you, ﬂame of Uduˆn.
Go back to the Shadow! You cannot pass.’
The Balrog made no answer. The ﬁre in it seemed to die, but the
darkness grew. It stepped forward slowly on to the bridge, and sud-
denly it drew itself up to a great height, and its wings were spread
from wall to wall; but still Gandalf could be seen, glimmering in the
gloom; he seemed small, and altogether alone: grey and bent, like a
wizened tree before the onset of a storm.
From out of the shadow a red sword leaped ﬂaming.
Glamdring glittered white in answer.
There was a ringing clash and a stab of white ﬁre. The Balrog fell
back, and its sword ﬂew up in molten fragments. The wizard swayed
on the bridge, stepped back a pace, and then again stood still.
‘You cannot pass!’ he said.
With a bound the Balrog leaped full upon the bridge. Its whip
whirled and hissed.

‘He cannot stand alone!’ cried Aragorn suddenly and ran back
along the bridge. ‘Elendil! ’ he shouted. ‘I am with you, Gandalf !’
‘Gondor!’ cried Boromir and leaped after him.
At that moment Gandalf lifted his staff, and crying aloud he smote
the bridge before him. The staff broke asunder and fell from his
hand. A blinding sheet of white ﬂame sprang up. The bridge cracked.
Right at the Balrog’s feet it broke, and the stone upon which it stood
crashed into the gulf, while the rest remained, poised, quivering like
a tongue of rock thrust out into emptiness.
With a terrible cry the Balrog fell forward, and its shadow plunged
down and vanished. But even as it fell it swung its whip, and the
thongs lashed and curled about the wizard’s knees, dragging him to
the brink. He staggered and fell, grasped vainly at the stone, and slid
into the abyss. ‘Fly, you fools!’ he cried, and was gone.
The ﬁres went out, and blank darkness fell. The Company stood
rooted with horror staring into the pit. Even as Aragorn and Boromir
came ﬂying back, the rest of the bridge cracked and fell. With a cry
Aragorn roused them.
‘Come! I will lead you now!’ he called. ‘We must obey his last
command. Follow me!’
They stumbled wildly up the great stairs beyond the door, Aragorn
leading, Boromir at the rear. At the top was a wide echoing passage.
Along this they ﬂed. Frodo heard Sam at his side weeping, and then
he found that he himself was weeping as he ran. Doom, doom, doom
the drum-beats rolled behind, mournful now and slow; doom!
They ran on. The light grew before them; great shafts pierced the
roof. They ran swifter. They passed into a hall, bright with daylight
from its high windows in the east. They ﬂed across it. Through its
huge broken doors they passed, and suddenly before them the Great
Gates opened, an arch of blazing light.
There was a guard of orcs crouching in the shadows behind the great
door-posts towering on either side, but the gates were shattered and
cast down. Aragorn smote to the ground the captain that stood in his
path, and the rest ﬂed in terror of his wrath. The Company swept past
them and took no heed of them. Out of the Gates they ran and sprang
down the huge and age-worn steps, the threshold of Moria.
Thus, at last, they came beyond hope under the sky and felt the
wind on their faces.
They did not halt until they were out of bowshot from the walls.
Dimrill Dale lay about them. The shadow of the Misty Mountains
lay upon it, but eastwards there was a golden light on the land. It
was but one hour after noon. The sun was shining; the clouds were
white and high.

They looked back. Dark yawned the archway of the Gates under
the mountain-shadow. Faint and far beneath the earth rolled the slow
drum-beats: doom. A thin black smoke trailed out. Nothing else was
to be seen; the dale all around was empty. Doom. Grief at last wholly
overcame them, and they wept long: some standing and silent, some
cast upon the ground. Doom, doom. The drum-beats faded.

Chapter 6
´
L O T H L O R I E N
‘Alas! I fear we cannot stay here longer,’ said Aragorn. He looked
towards the mountains and held up his sword. ‘Farewell, Gandalf !’
he cried. ‘Did I not say to you: if you pass the doors of Moria, beware?
Alas that I spoke true! What hope have we without you?’
He turned to the Company. ‘We must do without hope,’ he said.
‘At least we may yet be avenged. Let us gird ourselves and weep no
more! Come! We have a long road, and much to do.’
They rose and looked about them. Northward the dale ran up
into a glen of shadows between two great arms of the mountains,
above which three white peaks were shining: Celebdil, Fanuidhol,
Caradhras, the Mountains of Moria. At the head of the glen a torrent
ﬂowed like a white lace over an endless ladder of short falls, and a
mist of foam hung in the air about the mountains’ feet.
‘Yonder is the Dimrill Stair,’ said Aragorn, pointing to the falls.
‘Down the deep-cloven way that climbs beside the torrent we should
have come, if fortune had been kinder.’
‘Or Caradhras less cruel,’ said Gimli. ‘There he stands smiling in
the sun!’ He shook his ﬁst at the furthest of the snow-capped peaks
and turned away.
To the east the outﬂung arm of the mountains marched to a
sudden end, and far lands could be descried beyond them, wide and
vague. To the south the Misty Mountains receded endlessly as far
as sight could reach. Less than a mile away, and a little below them,
for they still stood high up on the west side of the dale, there lay a
mere. It was long and oval, shaped like a great spear-head thrust
deep into the northern glen; but its southern end was beyond the
shadows under the sunlit sky. Yet its waters were dark: a deep blue
like clear evening sky seen from a lamp-lit room. Its face was still
and unrufﬂed. About it lay a smooth sward, shelving down on all
sides to its bare unbroken rim.
‘There lies the Mirrormere, deep Kheled-zaˆram!’ said Gimli sadly.
‘I remember that he said: ‘‘May you have joy of the sight! But we
cannot linger there.’’ Now long shall I journey ere I have joy again.
It is I that must hasten away, and he that must remain.’
The Company now went down the road from the Gates. It was
rough and broken, fading to a winding track between heather and
whin that thrust amid the cracking stones. But still it could be seen

that once long ago a great paved way had wound upwards from the
lowlands to the Dwarf-kingdom. In places there were ruined works
of stone beside the path, and mounds of green topped with slender
birches, or ﬁr-trees sighing in the wind. An eastward bend led them
hard by the sward of Mirrormere, and there not far from the roadside
stood a single column broken at the top.
‘That is Durin’s Stone!’ cried Gimli. ‘I cannot pass without turning
aside for a moment to look at the wonder of the dale!’
‘Be swift then!’ said Aragorn, looking back towards the Gates.
‘The Sun sinks early. The Orcs will not, maybe, come out till after
dusk, but we must be far away before nightfall. The Moon is almost
spent, and it will be dark tonight.’
‘Come with me, Frodo!’ cried the dwarf, springing from the road.
‘I would not have you go without seeing Kheled-zaˆram.’ He ran down
the long green slope. Frodo followed slowly, drawn by the still blue
water in spite of hurt and weariness; Sam came up behind.
Beside the standing stone Gimli halted and looked up. It was
cracked and weather-worn, and the faint runes upon its side could
not be read. ‘This pillar marks the spot where Durin ﬁrst looked in
the Mirrormere,’ said the dwarf. ‘Let us look ourselves once, ere
we go!’
They stooped over the dark water. At ﬁrst they could see nothing.
Then slowly they saw the forms of the encircling mountains mirrored
in a profound blue, and the peaks were like plumes of white ﬂame
above them; beyond there was a space of sky. There like jewels sunk
in the deep shone glinting stars, though sunlight was in the sky above.
Of their own stooping forms no shadow could be seen.
‘O Kheled-zaˆram fair and wonderful!’ said Gimli. ‘There lies the
Crown of Durin till he wakes. Farewell!’ He bowed, and turned away,
and hastened back up the greensward to the road again.
‘What did you see?’ said Pippin to Sam, but Sam was too deep in
thought to answer.
The road now turned south and went quickly downwards, running
out from between the arms of the dale. Some way below the mere
they came on a deep well of water, clear as crystal, from which a
freshet fell over a stone lip and ran glistening and gurgling down a
steep rocky channel.
‘Here is the spring from which the Silverlode rises,’ said Gimli.
‘Do not drink of it! It is icy cold.’
‘Soon it becomes a swift river, and it gathers water from many
other mountain-streams,’ said Aragorn. ‘Our road leads beside it for
many miles. For I shall take you by the road that Gandalf chose, and
ﬁrst I hope to come to the woods where the Silverlode ﬂows into the

Great River – out yonder.’ They looked as he pointed, and before
them they could see the stream leaping down to the trough of the
valley, and then running on and away into the lower lands, until it
was lost in a golden haze.
‘There lie the woods of Lothlo´ rien!’ said Legolas. ‘That is the
fairest of all the dwellings of my people. There are no trees like the
trees of that land. For in the autumn their leaves fall not, but turn
to gold. Not till the spring comes and the new green opens do they
fall, and then the boughs are laden with yellow ﬂowers; and the ﬂoor
of the wood is golden, and golden is the roof, and its pillars are of
silver, for the bark of the trees is smooth and grey. So still our songs
in Mirkwood say. My heart would be glad if I were beneath the eaves
of that wood, and it were springtime!’
‘My heart will be glad, even in the winter,’ said Aragorn. ‘But it
lies many miles away. Let us hasten!’
For some time Frodo and Sam managed to keep up with the
others; but Aragorn was leading them at a great pace, and after a
while they lagged behind. They had eaten nothing since the early
morning. Sam’s cut was burning like ﬁre, and his head felt light. In
spite of the shining sun the wind seemed chill after the warm darkness
of Moria. He shivered. Frodo felt every step more painful and he
gasped for breath.
At last Legolas turned, and seeing them now far behind, he spoke
to Aragorn. The others halted, and Aragorn ran back, calling to
Boromir to come with him.
‘I am sorry, Frodo!’ he cried, full of concern. ‘So much has hap-
pened this day and we have such need of haste, that I have forgotten
that you were hurt; and Sam too. You should have spoken. We have
done nothing to ease you, as we ought, though all the orcs of Moria
were after us. Come now! A little further on there is a place where
we can rest for a little. There I will do what I can for you. Come,
Boromir! We will carry them.’
Soon afterwards they came upon another stream that ran down
from the west, and joined its bubbling water with the hurrying
Silverlode. Together they plunged over a fall of green-hued stone,
and foamed down into a dell. About it stood ﬁr-trees, short and bent,
and its sides were steep and clothed with harts-tongue and shrubs of
whortle-berry. At the bottom there was a level space through which
the stream ﬂowed noisily over shining pebbles. Here they rested. It
was now nearly three hours after noon, and they had come only a
few miles from the Gates. Already the sun was westering.
While Gimli and the two younger hobbits kindled a ﬁre of brush-
and ﬁr-wood, and drew water, Aragorn tended Sam and Frodo. Sam’s

wound was not deep, but it looked ugly, and Aragorn’s face was
grave as he examined it. After a moment he looked up with relief.
‘Good luck, Sam!’ he said. ‘Many have received worse than this
in payment for the slaying of their ﬁrst orc. The cut is not poisoned,
as the wounds of orc-blades too often are. It should heal well when
I have tended it. Bathe it when Gimli has heated water.’
He opened his pouch and drew out some withered leaves. ‘They
are dry, and some of their virtue has gone,’ he said, ‘but here I have
still some of the leaves of athelas that I gathered near Weathertop.
Crush one in the water, and wash the wound clean, and I will bind
it. Now it is your turn, Frodo!’
‘I am all right,’ said Frodo, reluctant to have his garments touched.
‘All I needed was some food and a little rest.’
‘No!’ said Aragorn. ‘We must have a look and see what the hammer
and the anvil have done to you. I still marvel that you are alive at
all.’ Gently he stripped off Frodo’s old jacket and worn tunic, and
gave a gasp of wonder. Then he laughed. The silver corslet shim-
mered before his eyes like the light upon a rippling sea. Carefully
he took it off and held it up, and the gems on it glittered like stars,
and the sound of the shaken rings was like the tinkle of rain in a
pool.
‘Look, my friends!’ he called. ‘Here’s a pretty hobbit-skin to wrap
an elven-princeling in! If it were known that hobbits had such hides,
all the hunters of Middle-earth would be riding to the Shire.’
‘And all the arrows of all the hunters in the world would be in
vain,’ said Gimli, gazing at the mail in wonder. ‘It is a mithril-coat.
Mithril! I have never seen or heard tell of one so fair. Is this the coat
that Gandalf spoke of ? Then he undervalued it. But it was well
given!’
‘I have often wondered what you and Bilbo were doing, so close
in his little room,’ said Merry. ‘Bless the old hobbit! I love him more
than ever. I hope we get a chance of telling him about it!’
There was a dark and blackened bruise on Frodo’s right side and
breast. Under the mail there was a shirt of soft leather, but at one
point the rings had been driven through it into the ﬂesh. Frodo’s left
side also was scored and bruised where he had been hurled against
the wall. While the others set the food ready, Aragorn bathed the
hurts with water in which athelas was steeped. The pungent fragrance
ﬁlled the dell, and all those who stooped over the steaming water felt
refreshed and strengthened. Soon Frodo felt the pain leave him, and
his breath grew easy: though he was stiff and sore to the touch for
many days. Aragorn bound some soft pads of cloth at his side.
‘The mail is marvellously light,’ he said. ‘Put it on again, if you
can bear it. My heart is glad to know that you have such a coat. Do

not lay it aside, even in sleep, unless fortune brings you where you
are safe for a while; and that will seldom chance while your quest
lasts.’
When they had eaten, the Company got ready to go on. They put
out the ﬁre and hid all traces of it. Then climbing out of the dell
they took to the road again. They had not gone far before the sun
sank behind the westward heights and great shadows crept down the
mountain-sides. Dusk veiled their feet, and mist rose in the hollows.
Away in the east the evening light lay pale upon the dim lands of
distant plain and wood. Sam and Frodo now feeling eased and greatly
refreshed were able to go at a fair pace, and with only one brief halt
Aragorn led the Company on for nearly three more hours.
It was dark. Deep night had fallen. There were many clear stars,
but the fast-waning moon would not be seen till late. Gimli and
Frodo were at the rear, walking softly and not speaking, listening for
any sound upon the road behind. At length Gimli broke the silence.
‘Not a sound but the wind,’ he said. ‘There are no goblins near,
or my ears are made of wood. It is to be hoped that the Orcs will be
content with driving us from Moria. And maybe that was all their
purpose, and they had nothing else to do with us – with the Ring.
Though Orcs will often pursue foes for many leagues into the plain,
if they have a fallen captain to avenge.’
Frodo did not answer. He looked at Sting, and the blade was dull.
Yet he had heard something, or thought he had. As soon as the
shadows had fallen about them and the road behind was dim, he had
heard again the quick patter of feet. Even now he heard it. He turned
swiftly. There were two tiny gleams of light behind, or for a moment
he thought he saw them, but at once they slipped aside and vanished.
‘What is it?’ said the dwarf.
‘I don’t know,’ answered Frodo. ‘I thought I heard feet, and I
thought I saw a light – like eyes. I have thought so often, since we
ﬁrst entered Moria.’
Gimli halted and stooped to the ground. ‘I hear nothing but the
night-speech of plant and stone,’ he said. ‘Come! Let us hurry! The
others are out of sight.’
The night-wind blew chill up the valley to meet them. Before them
a wide grey shadow loomed, and they heard an endless rustle of
leaves like poplars in the breeze.
‘Lothlo´rien!’ cried Legolas. ‘Lothlo´rien! We have come to the eaves
of the Golden Wood. Alas that it is winter!’
Under the night the trees stood tall before them, arched over the
road and stream that ran suddenly beneath their spreading boughs.

In the dim light of the stars their stems were grey, and their quivering
leaves a hint of fallow gold.
‘Lothlo´rien!’ said Aragorn. ‘Glad I am to hear again the wind in
the trees! We are still little more than ﬁve leagues from the Gates,
but we can go no further. Here let us hope that the virtue of the
Elves will keep us tonight from the peril that comes behind.’
‘If Elves indeed still dwell here in the darkening world,’ said Gimli.
‘It is long since any of my own folk journeyed hither back to the
land whence we wandered in ages long ago,’ said Legolas, ‘but we
hear that Lo´ rien is not yet deserted, for there is a secret power here
that holds evil from the land. Nevertheless its folk are seldom seen,
and maybe they dwell now deep in the woods and far from the
northern border.’
‘Indeed deep in the wood they dwell,’ said Aragorn, and sighed
as if some memory stirred in him. ‘We must fend for ourselves tonight.
We will go forward a short way, until the trees are all about us, and
then we will turn aside from the path and seek a place to rest in.’
He stepped forward; but Boromir stood irresolute and did not
follow. ‘Is there no other way?’ he said.
‘What other fairer way would you desire?’ said Aragorn.
‘A plain road, though it led through a hedge of swords,’ said
Boromir. ‘By strange paths has this Company been led, and so far
to evil fortune. Against my will we passed under the shades of Moria,
to our loss. And now we must enter the Golden Wood, you say. But
of that perilous land we have heard in Gondor, and it is said that
few come out who once go in; and of that few none have escaped
unscathed.’
‘Say not unscathed, but if you say unchanged, then maybe you will
speak the truth,’ said Aragorn. ‘But lore wanes in Gondor, Boromir,
if in the city of those who once were wise they now speak evil of
Lothlo´rien. Believe what you will, there is no other way for us – unless
you would go back to Moria-gate, or scale the pathless mountains, or
swim the Great River all alone.’
‘Then lead on!’ said Boromir. ‘But it is perilous.’
‘Perilous indeed,’ said Aragorn, ‘fair and perilous; but only evil
need fear it, or those who bring some evil with them. Follow me!’
They had gone little more than a mile into the forest when they
came upon another stream ﬂowing down swiftly from the tree-clad
slopes that climbed back westward towards the mountains. They
heard it splashing over a fall away among the shadows on their right.
Its dark hurrying waters ran across the path before them, and joined
the Silverlode in a swirl of dim pools among the roots of trees.
‘Here is Nimrodel!’ said Legolas. ‘Of this stream the Silvan Elves

made many songs long ago, and still we sing them in the North,
remembering the rainbow on its falls, and the golden ﬂowers that
ﬂoated in its foam. All is dark now and the Bridge of Nimrodel is
broken down. I will bathe my feet, for it is said that the water is
healing to the weary.’ He went forward and climbed down the deep-
cloven bank and stepped into the stream.
‘Follow me!’ he cried. ‘The water is not deep. Let us wade across!
On the further bank we can rest, and the sound of the falling water
may bring us sleep and forgetfulness of grief.’
One by one they climbed down and followed Legolas. For a
moment Frodo stood near the brink and let the water ﬂow over his
tired feet. It was cold but its touch was clean, and as he went on and
it mounted to his knees, he felt that the stain of travel and all weariness
was washed from his limbs.
When all the Company had crossed, they sat and rested and ate
a little food; and Legolas told them tales of Lothlo´ rien that the Elves
of Mirkwood still kept in their hearts, of sunlight and starlight upon
the meadows by the Great River before the world was grey.
At length a silence fell, and they heard the music of the waterfall
running sweetly in the shadows. Almost Frodo fancied that he could
hear a voice singing, mingled with the sound of the water.
‘Do you hear the voice of Nimrodel?’ asked Legolas. ‘I will sing
you a song of the maiden Nimrodel, who bore the same name as the
stream beside which she lived long ago. It is a fair song in our wood-
land tongue; but this is how it runs in the Westron Speech, as some
in Rivendell now sing it.’ In a soft voice hardly to be heard amid the
rustle of the leaves above them he began:
An Elven-maid there was of old,
A shining star by day:
Her mantle white was hemmed with gold,
Her shoes of silver-grey.
A star was bound upon her brows,
A light was on her hair
As sun upon the golden boughs
In Lo´rien the fair.
Her hair was long, her limbs were white,
And fair she was and free;
And in the wind she went as light
As leaf of linden-tree.

Beside the falls of Nimrodel,
By water clear and cool,
Her voice as falling silver fell
Into the shining pool.
Where now she wanders none can tell,
In sunlight or in shade;
For lost of yore was Nimrodel
And in the mountains strayed.
The elven-ship in haven grey
Beneath the mountain-lee
Awaited her for many a day
Beside the roaring sea.
A wind by night in Northern lands
Arose, and loud it cried,
And drove the ship from elven-strands
Across the streaming tide.
When dawn came dim the land was lost,
The mountains sinking grey
Beyond the heaving waves that tossed
Their plumes of blinding spray.
Amroth beheld the fading shore
Now low beyond the swell,
And cursed the faithless ship that bore
Him far from Nimrodel.
Of old he was an Elven-king,
A lord of tree and glen,
When golden were the boughs in spring
In fair Lothlo´rien.
From helm to sea they saw him leap,
As arrow from the string,
And dive into the water deep,
As mew upon the wing.
The wind was in his ﬂowing hair,
The foam about him shone;
Afar they saw him strong and fair
Go riding like a swan.

But from the West has come no word,
And on the Hither Shore
No tidings Elven-folk have heard
Of Amroth evermore.
The voice of Legolas faltered, and the song ceased. ‘I cannot sing
any more,’ he said. ‘That is but a part, for I have forgotten much. It
is long and sad, for it tells how sorrow came upon Lothlo´ rien, Lo´ rien
of the Blossom, when the Dwarves awakened evil in the mountains.’
‘But the Dwarves did not make the evil,’ said Gimli.
‘I said not so; yet evil came,’ answered Legolas sadly. ‘Then many
of the Elves of Nimrodel’s kindred left their dwellings and departed,
and she was lost far in the South, in the passes of the White Moun-
tains; and she came not to the ship where Amroth her lover waited
for her. But in the spring when the wind is in the new leaves the
echo of her voice may still be heard by the falls that bear her name.
And when the wind is in the South the voice of Amroth comes
up from the sea; for Nimrodel ﬂows into Silverlode, that Elves call
Celebrant, and Celebrant into Anduin the Great, and Anduin ﬂows
into the Bay of Belfalas whence the Elves of Lo´ rien set sail. But
neither Nimrodel nor Amroth came ever back.
‘It is told that she had a house built in the branches of a tree that
grew near the falls; for that was the custom of the Elves of Lo´ rien,
to dwell in the trees, and maybe it is so still. Therefore they were
called the Galadhrim, the Tree-people. Deep in their forest the trees
are very great. The people of the woods did not delve in the ground
like Dwarves, nor build strong places of stone before the Shadow
came.’
‘And even in these latter days dwelling in the trees might be
thought safer than sitting on the ground,’ said Gimli. He looked
across the stream to the road that led back to Dimrill Dale, and then
up into the roof of dark boughs above.
‘Your words bring good counsel, Gimli,’ said Aragorn. ‘We cannot
build a house, but tonight we will do as the Galadhrim and seek
refuge in the tree-tops, if we can. We have sat here beside the road
already longer than was wise.’
The Company now turned aside from the path, and went into the
shadow of the deeper woods, westward along the mountain-stream
away from Silverlode. Not far from the falls of Nimrodel they found
a cluster of trees, some of which overhung the stream. Their great grey
trunks were of mighty girth, but their height could not be guessed.
‘I will climb up,’ said Legolas. ‘I am at home among trees, by root
or bough, though these trees are of a kind strange to me, save as a

name in song. Mellyrn they are called, and are those that bear the
yellow blossom, but I have never climbed in one. I will see now what
is their shape and way of growth.’
‘Whatever it may be,’ said Pippin, ‘they will be marvellous trees
indeed if they can offer any rest at night, except to birds. I cannot
sleep on a perch!’
‘Then dig a hole in the ground,’ said Legolas, ‘if that is more after
the fashion of your kind. But you must dig swift and deep, if you
wish to hide from Orcs.’ He sprang lightly up from the ground and
caught a branch that grew from the trunk high above his head. But
even as he swung there for a moment, a voice spoke suddenly from
the tree-shadows above him.
‘Daro!’ it said in commanding tone, and Legolas dropped back to
earth in surprise and fear. He shrank against the bole of the tree.
‘Stand still!’ he whispered to the others. ‘Do not move or speak!’
There was a sound of soft laughter over their heads, and then
another clear voice spoke in an elven-tongue. Frodo could understand
little of what was said, for the speech that the Silvan folk east of
the mountains used among themselves was unlike that of the West.
Legolas looked up and answered in the same language.*
‘Who are they, and what do they say?’ asked Merry.
‘They’re Elves,’ said Sam. ‘Can’t you hear their voices?’
‘Yes, they are Elves,’ said Legolas; ‘and they say that you breathe
so loud that they could shoot you in the dark.’ Sam hastily put his
hand over his mouth. ‘But they say also that you need have no fear.
They have been aware of us for a long while. They heard my voice
across the Nimrodel, and knew that I was one of their Northern
kindred, and therefore they did not hinder our crossing; and after-
wards they heard my song. Now they bid me climb up with Frodo;
for they seem to have had some tidings of him and of our journey.
The others they ask to wait a little, and to keep watch at the foot of
the tree, until they have decided what is to be done.’
Out of the shadows a ladder was let down: it was made of rope,
silver-grey and glimmering in the dark, and though it looked slender
it proved strong enough to bear many men. Legolas ran lightly up,
and Frodo followed slowly; behind came Sam trying not to breathe
loudly. The branches of the mallorn-tree grew out nearly straight
from the trunk, and then swept upward; but near the top the main
stem divided into a crown of many boughs, and among these they
found that there had been built a wooden platform, or ﬂet as such
things were called in those days: the Elves called it a talan. It was
* See note in Appendix F: Of the Elves.

reached by a round hole in the centre through which the ladder
passed.
When Frodo came at last up on to the ﬂet he found Legolas seated
with three other Elves. They were clad in shadowy-grey, and could
not be seen among the tree-stems, unless they moved suddenly. They
stood up, and one of them uncovered a small lamp that gave out a
slender silver beam. He held it up, looking at Frodo’s face, and Sam’s.
Then he shut off the light again, and spoke words of welcome in his
elven-tongue. Frodo spoke haltingly in return.
‘Welcome!’ the Elf then said again in the Common Language,
speaking slowly. ‘We seldom use any tongue but our own; for we
dwell now in the heart of the forest, and do not willingly have dealings
with any other folk. Even our own kindred in the North are sundered
from us. But there are some of us still who go abroad for the gathering
of news and the watching of our enemies, and they speak the lan-
guages of other lands. I am one. Haldir is my name. My brothers,
Ru´mil and Orophin, speak little of your tongue.
‘But we have heard rumours of your coming, for the messengers
of Elrond passed by Lo´rien on their way home up the Dimrill Stair.
We had not heard of – hobbits, of halﬂings, for many a long year,
and did not know that any yet dwelt in Middle-earth. You do not
look evil! And since you come with an Elf of our kindred, we are
willing to befriend you, as Elrond asked; though it is not our custom
to lead strangers through our land. But you must stay here tonight.
How many are you?’
‘Eight,’ said Legolas. ‘Myself, four hobbits; and two men, one of
whom, Aragorn, is an Elf-friend of the folk of Westernesse.’
‘The name of Aragorn son of Arathorn is known in Lo´rien,’ said
Haldir, ‘and he has the favour of the Lady. All then is well. But you
have yet spoken only of seven.’
‘The eighth is a dwarf,’ said Legolas.
‘A dwarf !’ said Haldir. ‘That is not well. We have not had dealings
with the Dwarves since the Dark Days. They are not permitted in
our land. I cannot allow him to pass.’
‘But he is from the Lonely Mountain, one of Da´in’s trusty people,
and friendly to Elrond,’ said Frodo. ‘Elrond himself chose him to be
one of our companions, and he has been brave and faithful.’
The Elves spoke together in soft voices, and questioned Legolas
in their own tongue. ‘Very good,’ said Haldir at last. ‘We will do
this, though it is against our liking. If Aragorn and Legolas will guard
him, and answer for him, he shall pass; but he must go blindfold
through Lothlo´ rien.
‘But now we must debate no longer. Your folk must not remain
on the ground. We have been keeping watch on the rivers, ever since

we saw a great troop of Orcs going north towards Moria, along the
skirts of the mountains, many days ago. Wolves are howling on the
wood’s borders. If you have indeed come from Moria, the peril cannot
be far behind. Tomorrow early you must go on.
‘The four hobbits shall climb up here and stay with us – we do
not fear them! There is another talan in the next tree. There the
others must take refuge. You, Legolas, must answer to us for them.
Call us, if anything is amiss! And have an eye on that dwarf !’
Legolas at once went down the ladder to take Haldir’s message;
and soon afterwards Merry and Pippin clambered up on to the high
ﬂet. They were out of breath and seemed rather scared.
‘There!’ said Merry panting. ‘We have lugged up your blankets as
well as our own. Strider has hidden all the rest of our baggage in a
deep drift of leaves.’
‘You had no need of your burdens,’ said Haldir. ‘It is cold in the
tree-tops in winter, though the wind tonight is in the South; but we
have food and drink to give you that will drive away the night-chill,
and we have skins and cloaks to spare.’
The hobbits accepted this second (and far better) supper very
gladly. Then they wrapped themselves warmly, not only in the fur-
cloaks of the Elves, but in their own blankets as well, and tried to
go to sleep. But weary as they were only Sam found that easy to do.
Hobbits do not like heights, and do not sleep upstairs, even when
they have any stairs. The ﬂet was not at all to their liking as a bedroom.
It had no walls, not even a rail; only on one side was there a light
plaited screen, which could be moved and ﬁxed in different places
according to the wind.
Pippin went on talking for a while. ‘I hope, if I do go to sleep in
this bird-loft, that I shan’t roll off,’ he said.
‘Once I do get to sleep,’ said Sam, ‘I shall go on sleeping, whether
I roll off or no. And the less said, the sooner I’ll drop off, if you take
my meaning.’
Frodo lay for some time awake, and looked up at the stars glinting
through the pale roof of quivering leaves. Sam was snoring at his side
long before he himself closed his eyes. He could dimly see the grey
forms of two elves sitting motionless with their arms about their
knees, speaking in whispers. The other had gone down to take up
his watch on one of the lower branches. At last lulled by the wind
in the boughs above, and the sweet murmur of the falls of Nimrodel
below, Frodo fell asleep with the song of Legolas running in his mind.
Late in the night he woke. The other hobbits were asleep. The
Elves were gone. The sickle Moon was gleaming dimly among the

leaves. The wind was still. A little way off he heard a harsh laugh
and the tread of many feet on the ground below. There was a ring
of metal. The sounds died slowly away, and seemed to go southward,
on into the wood.
A head appeared suddenly through the hole in the ﬂet. Frodo sat
up in alarm and saw that it was a grey-hooded Elf. He looked towards
the hobbits.
‘What is it?’ said Frodo.
‘Yrch!’ said the Elf in a hissing whisper, and cast on to the ﬂet the
rope-ladder rolled up.
‘Orcs!’ said Frodo. ‘What are they doing?’ But the Elf had gone.
There were no more sounds. Even the leaves were silent, and the
very falls seemed to be hushed. Frodo sat and shivered in his wraps.
He was thankful that they had not been caught on the ground; but
he felt that the trees offered little protection, except concealment.
Orcs were as keen as hounds on a scent, it was said, but they could
also climb. He drew out Sting: it ﬂashed and glittered like a blue
ﬂame; and then slowly faded again and grew dull. In spite of the
fading of his sword the feeling of immediate danger did not leave
Frodo, rather it grew stronger. He got up and crawled to the opening
and peered down. He was almost certain that he could hear stealthy
movements at the tree’s foot far below.
Not Elves; for the woodland folk were altogether noiseless in their
movements. Then he heard faintly a sound like snifﬁng; and some-
thing seemed to be scrabbling on the bark of the tree-trunk. He stared
down into the dark, holding his breath.
Something was now climbing slowly, and its breath came like a
soft hissing through closed teeth. Then coming up, close to the stem,
Frodo saw two pale eyes. They stopped and gazed upward unwinking.
Suddenly they turned away, and a shadowy ﬁgure slipped round the
trunk of the tree and vanished.
Immediately afterwards Haldir came climbing swiftly up through
the branches. ‘There was something in this tree that I have never
seen before,’ he said. ‘It was not an orc. It ﬂed as soon as I touched
the tree-stem. It seemed to be wary, and to have some skill in trees,
or I might have thought that it was one of you hobbits.
‘I did not shoot, for I dared not arouse any cries: we cannot
risk battle. A strong company of Orcs has passed. They crossed the
Nimrodel – curse their foul feet in its clean water! – and went on
down the old road beside the river. They seemed to pick up some
scent, and they searched the ground for a while near the place where
you halted. The three of us could not challenge a hundred, so we
went ahead and spoke with feigned voices, leading them on into the
wood.

‘Orophin has now gone in haste back to our dwellings to warn
our people. None of the Orcs will ever return out of Lo´rien. And
there will be many Elves hidden on the northern border before
another night falls. But you must take the road south as soon as it
is fully light.’
Day came pale from the East. As the light grew it ﬁltered through
the yellow leaves of the mallorn, and it seemed to the hobbits that
the early sun of a cool summer’s morning was shining. Pale-blue sky
peeped among the moving branches. Looking through an opening
on the south side of the ﬂet Frodo saw all the valley of the Silverlode
lying like a sea of fallow gold tossing gently in the breeze.
The morning was still young and cold when the Company set out
again, guided now by Haldir and his brother Ru´mil. ‘Farewell, sweet
Nimrodel!’ cried Legolas. Frodo looked back and caught a gleam of
white foam among the grey tree-stems. ‘Farewell,’ he said. It seemed
to him that he would never hear again a running water so beautiful,
for ever blending its innumerable notes in an endless changeful music.
They went back to the path that still went on along the west side
of the Silverlode, and for some way they followed it southward. There
were the prints of orc-feet in the earth. But soon Haldir turned aside
into the trees and halted on the bank of the river under their shadows.
‘There is one of my people yonder across the stream,’ he said,
‘though you may not see him.’ He gave a call like the low whistle of
a bird, and out of a thicket of young trees an Elf stepped, clad in
grey, but with his hood thrown back; his hair glinted like gold in the
morning sun. Haldir skilfully cast over the stream a coil of grey rope,
and he caught it and bound the end about a tree near the bank.
‘Celebrant is already a strong stream here, as you see,’ said Haldir,
‘and it runs both swift and deep, and is very cold. We do not set foot
in it so far north, unless we must. But in these days of watchfulness
we do not make bridges. This is how we cross! Follow me!’ He made
his end of the rope fast about another tree, and then ran lightly along
it, over the river and back again, as if he were on a road.
‘I can walk this path,’ said Legolas; ‘but the others have not this
skill. Must they swim?’
‘No!’ said Haldir. ‘We have two more ropes. We will fasten them
above the other, one shoulder-high, and another half-high, and hold-
ing these the strangers should be able to cross with care.’
When this slender bridge had been made, the Company passed
over, some cautiously and slowly, others more easily. Of the hobbits
Pippin proved the best for he was sure-footed, and he walked over
quickly, holding only with one hand; but he kept his eyes on the
bank ahead and did not look down. Sam shufﬂed along, clutching

hard, and looking down into the pale eddying water as if it was a
chasm in the mountains.
He breathed with relief when he was safely across. ‘Live and learn!
as my gaffer used to say. Though he was thinking of gardening, not
of roosting like a bird, nor of trying to walk like a spider. Not even
my uncle Andy ever did a trick like that!’
When at length all the Company was gathered on the east bank
of the Silverlode, the Elves untied the ropes and coiled two of them.
Ru´mil, who had remained on the other side, drew back the last one,
slung it on his shoulder, and with a wave of his hand went away,
back to Nimrodel to keep watch.
‘Now, friends,’ said Haldir, ‘you have entered the Naith of Lo´rien,
or the Gore, as you would say, for it is the land that lies like a
spearhead between the arms of Silverlode and Anduin the Great. We
allow no strangers to spy out the secrets of the Naith. Few indeed
are permitted even to set foot there.
‘As was agreed, I shall here blindfold the eyes of Gimli the Dwarf.
The others may walk free for a while, until we come nearer to our
dwellings, down in Egladil, in the Angle between the waters.’
This was not at all to the liking of Gimli. ‘The agreement was
made without my consent,’ he said. ‘I will not walk blindfold, like a
beggar or a prisoner. And I am no spy. My folk have never had
dealings with any of the servants of the Enemy. Neither have we
done harm to the Elves. I am no more likely to betray you than
Legolas, or any other of my companions.’
‘I do not doubt you,’ said Haldir. ‘Yet this is our law. I am not
the master of the law, and cannot set it aside. I have done much in
letting you set foot over Celebrant.’
Gimli was obstinate. He planted his feet ﬁrmly apart, and laid his
hand upon the haft of his axe. ‘I will go forward free,’ he said, ‘or I
will go back and seek my own land, where I am known to be true of
word, though I perish alone in the wilderness.’
‘You cannot go back,’ said Haldir sternly. ‘Now you have come
thus far, you must be brought before the Lord and the Lady. They
shall judge you, to hold you or to give you leave, as they will. You
cannot cross the rivers again, and behind you there are now secret
sentinels that you cannot pass. You would be slain before you saw
them.’
Gimli drew his axe from his belt. Haldir and his companion bent
their bows. ‘A plague on Dwarves and their stiff necks!’ said Legolas.
‘Come!’ said Aragorn. ‘If I am still to lead this Company, you
must do as I bid. It is hard upon the Dwarf to be thus singled out.
We will all be blindfold, even Legolas. That will be best, though it
will make the journey slow and dull.’

Gimli laughed suddenly. ‘A merry troop of fools we shall look!
Will Haldir lead us all on a string, like many blind beggars with one
dog? But I will be content, if only Legolas here shares my blindness.’
‘I am an Elf and a kinsman here,’ said Legolas, becoming angry
in his turn.
‘Now let us cry: ‘‘a plague on the stiff necks of Elves!’’ ’ said
Aragorn. ‘But the Company shall all fare alike. Come, bind our eyes,
Haldir!’
‘I shall claim full amends for every fall and stubbed toe, if you do
not lead us well,’ said Gimli as they bound a cloth about his eyes.
‘You will have no claim,’ said Haldir. ‘I shall lead you well, and
the paths are smooth and straight.’
‘Alas for the folly of these days!’ said Legolas. ‘Here all are enemies
of the one Enemy, and yet I must walk blind, while the sun is merry
in the woodland under leaves of gold!’
‘Folly it may seem,’ said Haldir. ‘Indeed in nothing is the power
of the Dark Lord more clearly shown than in the estrangement that
divides all those who still oppose him. Yet so little faith and trust do
we ﬁnd now in the world beyond Lothlo´rien, unless maybe in Riven-
dell, that we dare not by our own trust endanger our land. We live
now upon an island amid many perils, and our hands are more often
upon the bowstring than upon the harp.
‘The rivers long defended us, but they are a sure guard no more;
for the Shadow has crept northward all about us. Some speak of
departing, yet for that it already seems too late. The mountains to
the west are growing evil; to the east the lands are waste, and full of
Sauron’s creatures; and it is rumoured that we cannot now safely
pass southward through Rohan, and the mouths of the Great River
are watched by the Enemy. Even if we could come to the shores of
the Sea, we should ﬁnd no longer any shelter there. It is said that
there are still havens of the High Elves, but they are far north and
west, beyond the land of the Halﬂings. But where that may be, though
the Lord and Lady may know, I do not.’
‘You ought at least to guess, since you have seen us,’ said Merry.
‘There are Elf-havens west of my land, the Shire, where Hobbits
live.’
‘Happy folk are Hobbits to dwell near the shores of the sea!’ said
Haldir. ‘It is long indeed since any of my folk have looked on it, yet
still we remember it in song. Tell me of these havens as we walk.’
‘I cannot,’ said Merry. ‘I have never seen them. I have never been
out of my own land before. And if I had known what the world
outside was like, I don’t think I should have had the heart to leave
it.’
‘Not even to see fair Lothlo´rien?’ said Haldir. ‘The world is indeed

full of peril, and in it there are many dark places; but still there is
much that is fair, and though in all lands love is now mingled with
grief, it grows perhaps the greater.
‘Some there are among us who sing that the Shadow will draw
back, and peace shall come again. Yet I do not believe that the world
about us will ever again be as it was of old, or the light of the Sun
as it was aforetime. For the Elves, I fear, it will prove at best a
truce, in which they may pass to the Sea unhindered and leave the
Middle-earth for ever. Alas for Lothlo´rien that I love! It would be a
poor life in a land where no mallorn grew. But if there are mallorn-
trees beyond the Great Sea, none have reported it.’
As they spoke thus, the Company ﬁled slowly along the paths in
the wood, led by Haldir, while the other Elf walked behind. They
felt the ground beneath their feet smooth and soft, and after a while
they walked more freely, without fear of hurt or fall. Being deprived
of sight, Frodo found his hearing and other senses sharpened. He
could smell the trees and the trodden grass. He could hear many
different notes in the rustle of the leaves overhead, the river murmur-
ing away on his right, and the thin clear voices of birds high in the
sky. He felt the sun upon his face and hands when they passed
through an open glade.
As soon as he set foot upon the far bank of Silverlode a strange
feeling had come upon him, and it deepened as he walked on into
the Naith: it seemed to him that he had stepped over a bridge of
time into a corner of the Elder Days, and was now walking in a world
that was no more. In Rivendell there was memory of ancient things;
in Lo´ rien the ancient things still lived on in the waking world. Evil
had been seen and heard there, sorrow had been known; the Elves
feared and distrusted the world outside: wolves were howling on the
wood’s borders: but on the land of Lo´ rien no shadow lay.
All that day the Company marched on, until they felt the cool
evening come and heard the early night-wind whispering among
many leaves. Then they rested and slept without fear upon the
ground; for their guides would not permit them to unbind their eyes,
and they could not climb. In the morning they went on again, walking
without haste. At noon they halted, and Frodo was aware that they
had passed out under the shining Sun. Suddenly he heard the sound
of many voices all around him.
A marching host of Elves had come up silently: they were hastening
towards the northern borders to guard against any attack from Moria;
and they brought news, some of which Haldir reported. The maraud-
ing orcs had been waylaid and almost all destroyed; the remnant had
ﬂed westward towards the mountains, and were being pursued. A

strange creature also had been seen, running with bent back and with
hands near the ground, like a beast and yet not of beast-shape. It
had eluded capture, and they had not shot it, not knowing whether
it was good or ill, and it had vanished down the Silverlode southward.
‘Also,’ said Haldir, ‘they bring me a message from the Lord and
Lady of the Galadhrim. You are all to walk free, even the dwarf
Gimli. It seems that the Lady knows who and what is each member
of your Company. New messages have come from Rivendell perhaps.’
He removed the bandage ﬁrst from Gimli’s eyes. ‘Your pardon!’
he said, bowing low. ‘Look on us now with friendly eyes! Look and
be glad, for you are the ﬁrst dwarf to behold the trees of the Naith
of Lo´rien since Durin’s Day!’
When his eyes were in turn uncovered, Frodo looked up and
caught his breath. They were standing in an open space. To the left
stood a great mound, covered with a sward of grass as green as
Springtime in the Elder Days. Upon it, as a double crown, grew two
circles of trees: the outer had bark of snowy white, and were leaﬂess
but beautiful in their shapely nakedness; the inner were mallorn-trees
of great height, still arrayed in pale gold. High amid the branches of
a towering tree that stood in the centre of all there gleamed a white
ﬂet. At the feet of the trees, and all about the green hillsides the grass
was studded with small golden ﬂowers shaped like stars. Among
them, nodding on slender stalks, were other ﬂowers, white and palest
green: they glimmered as a mist amid the rich hue of the grass. Over
all the sky was blue, and the sun of afternoon glowed upon the hill
and cast long green shadows beneath the trees.
‘Behold! You are come to Cerin Amroth,’ said Haldir. ‘For this
is the heart of the ancient realm as it was long ago, and here is the
mound of Amroth, where in happier days his high house was built.
Here ever bloom the winter ﬂowers in the unfading grass: the yellow
elanor, and the pale niphredil. Here we will stay awhile, and come to
the city of the Galadhrim at dusk.’
The others cast themselves down upon the fragrant grass, but
Frodo stood awhile still lost in wonder. It seemed to him that he had
stepped through a high window that looked on a vanished world. A
light was upon it for which his language had no name. All that he
saw was shapely, but the shapes seemed at once clear cut, as if they
had been ﬁrst conceived and drawn at the uncovering of his eyes,
and ancient as if they had endured for ever. He saw no colour but
those he knew, gold and white and blue and green, but they were
fresh and poignant, as if he had at that moment ﬁrst perceived them
and made for them names new and wonderful. In winter here no
heart could mourn for summer or for spring. No blemish or sickness

or deformity could be seen in anything that grew upon the earth. On
the land of Lo´rien there was no stain.
He turned and saw that Sam was now standing beside him, looking
round with a puzzled expression, and rubbing his eyes as if he was not
sure that he was awake. ‘It’s sunlight and bright day, right enough,’ he
said. ‘I thought that Elves were all for moon and stars: but this is
more Elvish than anything I ever heard tell of. I feel as if I was inside
a song, if you take my meaning.’
Haldir looked at them, and he seemed indeed to take the meaning
of both thought and word. He smiled. ‘You feel the power of the
Lady of the Galadhrim,’ he said. ‘Would it please you to climb with
me up Cerin Amroth?’
They followed him as he stepped lightly up the grass-clad slopes.
Though he walked and breathed, and about him living leaves and
ﬂowers were stirred by the same cool wind as fanned his face, Frodo
felt that he was in a timeless land that did not fade or change or fall
into forgetfulness. When he had gone and passed again into the outer
world, still Frodo the wanderer from the Shire would walk there,
upon the grass among elanor and niphredil in fair Lothlo´rien.
They entered the circle of white trees. As they did so the South
Wind blew upon Cerin Amroth and sighed among the branches.
Frodo stood still, hearing far off great seas upon beaches that had
long ago been washed away, and sea-birds crying whose race had
perished from the earth.
Haldir had gone on and was now climbing to the high ﬂet. As
Frodo prepared to follow him, he laid his hand upon the tree beside
the ladder: never before had he been so suddenly and so keenly aware
of the feel and texture of a tree’s skin and of the life within it. He
felt a delight in wood and the touch of it, neither as forester nor as
carpenter; it was the delight of the living tree itself.
As he stepped out at last upon the lofty platform, Haldir took his
hand and turned him towards the South. ‘Look this way ﬁrst!’ he
said.
Frodo looked and saw, still at some distance, a hill of many mighty
trees, or a city of green towers: which it was he could not tell. Out
of it, it seemed to him that the power and light came that held all
the land in sway. He longed suddenly to ﬂy like a bird to rest in the
green city. Then he looked eastward and saw all the land of Lo´ rien
running down to the pale gleam of Anduin, the Great River. He lifted
his eyes across the river and all the light went out, and he was back
again in the world he knew. Beyond the river the land appeared ﬂat
and empty, formless and vague, until far away it rose again like a
wall, dark and drear. The sun that lay on Lothlo´rien had no power
to enlighten the shadow of that distant height.

‘There lies the fastness of Southern Mirkwood,’ said Haldir. ‘It is
clad in a forest of dark ﬁr, where the trees strive one against another
and their branches rot and wither. In the midst upon a stony height
stands Dol Guldur, where long the hidden Enemy had his dwelling.
We fear that now it is inhabited again, and with power sevenfold. A
black cloud lies often over it of late. In this high place you may see
the two powers that are opposed one to another; and ever they strive
now in thought, but whereas the light perceives the very heart of the
darkness, its own secret has not been discovered. Not yet.’ He turned
and climbed swiftly down, and they followed him.
At the hill’s foot Frodo found Aragorn, standing still and silent as
a tree; but in his hand was a small golden bloom of elanor, and a
light was in his eyes. He was wrapped in some fair memory: and as
Frodo looked at him he knew that he beheld things as they once had
been in this same place. For the grim years were removed from the
face of Aragorn, and he seemed clothed in white, a young lord tall
and fair; and he spoke words in the Elvish tongue to one whom Frodo
could not see. Arwen vanimelda, nama´rie¨! he said, and then he drew
a breath, and returning out of his thought he looked at Frodo and
smiled.
‘Here is the heart of Elvendom on earth,’ he said, ‘and here my
heart dwells ever, unless there be a light beyond the dark roads that
we still must tread, you and I. Come with me!’ And taking Frodo’s
hand in his, he left the hill of Cerin Amroth and came there never
again as living man.

Chapter 7
T H E  M I R R O R  O F  G A L A D R I E L
The sun was sinking behind the mountains, and the shadows were
deepening in the woods, when they went on again. Their paths now
went into thickets where the dusk had already gathered. Night came
beneath the trees as they walked, and the Elves uncovered their silver
lamps.
Suddenly they came out into the open again and found themselves
under a pale evening sky pricked by a few early stars. There was a
wide treeless space before them, running in a great circle and bending
away on either hand. Beyond it was a deep fosse lost in soft shadow,
but the grass upon its brink was green, as if it glowed still in memory
of the sun that had gone. Upon the further side there rose to a great
height a green wall encircling a green hill thronged with mallorn-trees
taller than any they had yet seen in all the land. Their height could
not be guessed, but they stood up in the twilight like living towers.
In their many-tiered branches and amid their ever-moving leaves
countless lights were gleaming, green and gold and silver. Haldir
turned towards the Company.
‘Welcome to Caras Galadhon!’ he said. ‘Here is the city of the
Galadhrim where dwell the Lord Celeborn and Galadriel the Lady
of Lo´ rien. But we cannot enter here, for the gates do not look north-
ward. We must go round to the southern side, and the way is not
short, for the city is great.’
There was a road paved with white stone running on the outer
brink of the fosse. Along this they went westward, with the city ever
climbing up like a green cloud upon their left; and as the night
deepened more lights sprang forth, until all the hill seemed aﬁre with
stars. They came at last to a white bridge, and crossing found the
great gates of the city: they faced south-west, set between the ends
of the encircling wall that here overlapped, and they were tall and
strong, and hung with many lamps.
Haldir knocked and spoke, and the gates opened soundlessly; but
of guards Frodo could see no sign. The travellers passed within, and
the gates shut behind them. They were in a deep lane between the
ends of the wall, and passing quickly through it they entered the City
of the Trees. No folk could they see, nor hear any feet upon the
paths; but there were many voices, about them, and in the air above.

Far away up on the hill they could hear the sound of singing falling
from on high like soft rain upon leaves.
They went along many paths and climbed many stairs, until they
came to the high places and saw before them amid a wide lawn a
fountain shimmering. It was lit by silver lamps that swung from the
boughs of trees, and it fell into a basin of silver, from which a white
stream spilled. Upon the south side of the lawn there stood the
mightiest of all the trees; its great smooth bole gleamed like grey silk,
and up it towered, until its ﬁrst branches, far above, opened their
huge limbs under shadowy clouds of leaves. Beside it a broad white
ladder stood, and at its foot three Elves were seated. They sprang
up as the travellers approached, and Frodo saw that they were tall
and clad in grey mail, and from their shoulders hung long white
cloaks.
‘Here dwell Celeborn and Galadriel,’ said Haldir. ‘It is their wish
that you should ascend and speak with them.’
One of the Elf-wardens then blew a clear note on a small horn,
and it was answered three times from far above. ‘I will go ﬁrst,’ said
Haldir. ‘Let Frodo come next and with him Legolas. The others may
follow as they wish. It is a long climb for those that are not accustomed
to such stairs, but you may rest upon the way.’
As he climbed slowly up Frodo passed many ﬂets: some on one
side, some on another, and some set about the bole of the tree, so
that the ladder passed through them. At a great height above the
ground he came to a wide talan, like the deck of a great ship. On it
was built a house, so large that almost it would have served for a hall
of Men upon the earth. He entered behind Haldir, and found that
he was in a chamber of oval shape, in the midst of which grew the
trunk of the great mallorn, now tapering towards its crown, and yet
making still a pillar of wide girth.
The chamber was ﬁlled with a soft light; its walls were green and
silver and its roof of gold. Many Elves were seated there. On two
chairs beneath the bole of the tree and canopied by a living bough
there sat, side by side, Celeborn and Galadriel. They stood up to
greet their guests, after the manner of Elves, even those who were
accounted mighty kings. Very tall they were, and the Lady no less
tall than the Lord; and they were grave and beautiful. They were
clad wholly in white; and the hair of the Lady was of deep gold, and
the hair of the Lord Celeborn was of silver long and bright; but no
sign of age was upon them, unless it were in the depths of their eyes;
for these were keen as lances in the starlight, and yet profound, the
wells of deep memory.
Haldir led Frodo before them, and the Lord welcomed him in his

own tongue. The Lady Galadriel said no word but looked long upon
his face.
‘Sit now beside my chair, Frodo of the Shire!’ said Celeborn.
‘When all have come we will speak together.’
Each of the companions he greeted courteously by name as they
entered. ‘Welcome Aragorn son of Arathorn!’ he said. ‘It is eight and
thirty years of the world outside since you came to this land; and
those years lie heavy on you. But the end is near, for good or ill.
Here lay aside your burden for a while!’
‘Welcome son of Thranduil! Too seldom do my kindred journey
hither from the North.’
‘Welcome Gimli son of Glo´in! It is long indeed since we saw one
of Durin’s folk in Caras Galadhon. But today we have broken our
long law. May it be a sign that though the world is now dark better
days are at hand, and that friendship shall be renewed between our
peoples.’ Gimli bowed low.
When all the guests were seated before his chair the Lord looked
at them again. ‘Here there are eight,’ he said. ‘Nine were to set out:
so said the messages. But maybe there has been some change of
counsel that we have not heard. Elrond is far away, and darkness
gathers between us, and all this year the shadows have grown longer.’
‘Nay, there was no change of counsel,’ said the Lady Galadriel,
speaking for the ﬁrst time. Her voice was clear and musical, but
deeper than woman’s wont. ‘Gandalf the Grey set out with the Com-
pany, but he did not pass the borders of this land. Now tell us where
he is; for I much desired to speak with him again. But I cannot see
him from afar, unless he comes within the fences of Lothlo´rien: a
grey mist is about him, and the ways of his feet and of his mind are
hidden from me.’
‘Alas!’ said Aragorn. ‘Gandalf the Grey fell into shadow. He
remained in Moria and did not escape.’
At these words all the Elves in the hall cried aloud in grief and
amazement. ‘These are evil tidings,’ said Celeborn, ‘the most evil
that have been spoken here in long years full of grievous deeds.’ He
turned to Haldir. ‘Why has nothing of this been told to me before?’
he asked in the elven-tongue.
‘We have not spoken to Haldir of our deeds or our purpose,’ said
Legolas. ‘At ﬁrst we were weary and danger was too close behind;
and afterwards we almost forgot our grief for a time, as we walked
in gladness on the fair paths of Lo´rien.’
‘Yet our grief is great and our loss cannot be mended,’ said Frodo.
‘Gandalf was our guide, and he led us through Moria; and when our
escape seemed beyond hope he saved us, and he fell.’

‘Tell us now the full tale!’ said Celeborn.
Then Aragorn recounted all that had happened upon the pass of
Caradhras, and in the days that followed; and he spoke of Balin and
his book, and the ﬁght in the Chamber of Mazarbul, and the ﬁre,
and the narrow bridge, and the coming of the Terror. ‘An evil of the
Ancient World it seemed, such as I have never seen before,’ said
Aragorn. ‘It was both a shadow and a ﬂame, strong and terrible.’
‘It was a Balrog of Morgoth,’ said Legolas; ‘of all elf-banes the
most deadly, save the One who sits in the Dark Tower.’
‘Indeed I saw upon the bridge that which haunts our darkest
dreams, I saw Durin’s Bane,’ said Gimli in a low voice, and dread
was in his eyes.
‘Alas!’ said Celeborn. ‘We long have feared that under Caradhras
a terror slept. But had I known that the Dwarves had stirred up this
evil in Moria again, I would have forbidden you to pass the northern
borders, you and all that went with you. And if it were possible, one
would say that at the last Gandalf fell from wisdom into folly, going
needlessly into the net of Moria.’
‘He would be rash indeed that said that thing,’ said Galadriel
gravely. ‘Needless were none of the deeds of Gandalf in life. Those
that followed him knew not his mind and cannot report his full
purpose. But however it may be with the guide, the followers are
blameless. Do not repent of your welcome to the Dwarf. If our folk
had been exiled long and far from Lothlo´ rien, who of the Galadhrim,
even Celeborn the Wise, would pass nigh and would not wish to look
upon their ancient home, though it had become an abode of dragons?
‘Dark is the water of Kheled-zaˆram, and cold are the springs of
Kibil-naˆla, and fair were the many-pillared halls of Khazad-duˆm in
Elder Days before the fall of mighty kings beneath the stone.’ She
looked upon Gimli, who sat glowering and sad, and she smiled. And
the Dwarf, hearing the names given in his own ancient tongue, looked
up and met her eyes; and it seemed to him that he looked suddenly
into the heart of an enemy and saw there love and understanding.
Wonder came into his face, and then he smiled in answer.
He rose clumsily and bowed in dwarf-fashion, saying: ‘Yet more
fair is the living land of Lo´ rien, and the Lady Galadriel is above all
the jewels that lie beneath the earth!’
There was a silence. At length Celeborn spoke again. ‘I did not
know that your plight was so evil,’ he said. ‘Let Gimli forget my
harsh words: I spoke in the trouble of my heart. I will do what I can
to aid you, each according to his wish and need, but especially that
one of the little folk who bears the burden.’
‘Your quest is known to us,’ said Galadriel, looking at Frodo. ‘But

we will not here speak of it more openly. Yet not in vain will it prove,
maybe, that you came to this land seeking aid, as Gandalf himself
plainly purposed. For the Lord of the Galadhrim is accounted the
wisest of the Elves of Middle-earth, and a giver of gifts beyond the
power of kings. He has dwelt in the West since the days of dawn,
and I have dwelt with him years uncounted; for ere the fall of
Nargothrond or Gondolin I passed over the mountains, and together
through ages of the world we have fought the long defeat.
‘I it was who ﬁrst summoned the White Council. And if my designs
had not gone amiss, it would have been governed by Gandalf the
Grey, and then mayhap things would have gone otherwise. But even
now there is hope left. I will not give you counsel, saying do this, or
do that. For not in doing or contriving, nor in choosing between this
course and another, can I avail; but only in knowing what was and is,
and in part also what shall be. But this I will say to you: your Quest
stands upon the edge of a knife. Stray but a little and it will fail, to the
ruin of all. Yet hope remains while all the Company is true.’
And with that word she held them with her eyes, and in silence
looked searchingly at each of them in turn. None save Legolas and
Aragorn could long endure her glance. Sam quickly blushed and
hung his head.
At length the Lady Galadriel released them from her eyes, and
she smiled. ‘Do not let your hearts be troubled,’ she said. ‘Tonight
you shall sleep in peace.’ Then they sighed and felt suddenly weary,
as those who have been questioned long and deeply, though no words
had been spoken openly.
‘Go now!’ said Celeborn. ‘You are worn with sorrow and much
toil. Even if your Quest did not concern us closely, you should have
refuge in this City, until you were healed and refreshed. Now you
shall rest, and we will not speak of your further road for a while.’
That night the Company slept upon the ground, much to the
satisfaction of the hobbits. The Elves spread for them a pavilion
among the trees near the fountain, and in it they laid soft couches;
then speaking words of peace with fair Elvish voices they left them.
For a little while the travellers talked of their night before in the
tree-tops, and of their day’s journey, and of the Lord and Lady; for
they had not yet the heart to look further back.
‘What did you blush for, Sam?’ said Pippin. ‘You soon broke
down. Anyone would have thought you had a guilty conscience. I
hope it was nothing worse than a wicked plot to steal one of my
blankets.’
‘I never thought no such thing,’ answered Sam, in no mood for
jest. ‘If you want to know, I felt as if I hadn’t got nothing on, and I

didn’t like it. She seemed to be looking inside me and asking me
what I would do if she gave me the chance of ﬂying back home to
the Shire to a nice little hole with – with a bit of garden of my own.’
‘That’s funny,’ said Merry. ‘Almost exactly what I felt myself;
only, only well, I don’t think I’ll say any more,’ he ended lamely.
All of them, it seemed, had fared alike: each had felt that he was
offered a choice between a shadow full of fear that lay ahead, and
something that he greatly desired: clear before his mind it lay, and
to get it he had only to turn aside from the road and leave the Quest
and the war against Sauron to others.
‘And it seemed to me, too,’ said Gimli, ‘that my choice would
remain secret and known only to myself.’
‘To me it seemed exceedingly strange,’ said Boromir. ‘Maybe it
was only a test, and she thought to read our thoughts for her own
good purpose; but almost I should have said that she was tempting
us, and offering what she pretended to have the power to give. It
need not be said that I refused to listen. The Men of Minas Tirith
are true to their word.’ But what he thought that the Lady had offered
him Boromir did not tell.
And as for Frodo, he would not speak, though Boromir pressed him
with questions. ‘She held you long in her gaze, Ring-bearer,’ he said.
‘Yes,’ said Frodo; ‘but whatever came into my mind then I will
keep there.’
‘Well, have a care!’ said Boromir. ‘I do not feel too sure of this
Elvish Lady and her purposes.’
‘Speak no evil of the Lady Galadriel!’ said Aragorn sternly. ‘You
know not what you say. There is in her and in this land no evil,
unless a man bring it hither himself. Then let him beware! But tonight
I shall sleep without fear for the ﬁrst time since I left Rivendell. And
may I sleep deep, and forget for a while my grief ! I am weary in body
and in heart.’ He cast himself down upon his couch and fell at once
into a long sleep.
The others soon did the same, and no sound or dream disturbed
their slumber. When they woke they found that the light of day was
broad upon the lawn before the pavilion, and the fountain rose and
fell glittering in the sun.
They remained some days in Lothlo´rien, so far as they could tell
or remember. All the while that they dwelt there the sun shone clear,
save for a gentle rain that fell at times, and passed away leaving all
things fresh and clean. The air was cool and soft, as if it were early
spring, yet they felt about them the deep and thoughtful quiet of
winter. It seemed to them that they did little but eat and drink and
rest, and walk among the trees; and it was enough.

They had not seen the Lord and Lady again, and they had little
speech with the Elven-folk; for few of these knew or would use the
Westron tongue. Haldir had bidden them farewell and gone back
again to the fences of the North, where great watch was now kept
since the tidings of Moria that the Company had brought. Legolas
was away much among the Galadhrim, and after the ﬁrst night he
did not sleep with the other companions, though he returned to eat
and talk with them. Often he took Gimli with him when he went
abroad in the land, and the others wondered at this change.
Now as the companions sat or walked together they spoke of
Gandalf, and all that each had known and seen of him came clear
before their minds. As they were healed of hurt and weariness of
body the grief of their loss grew more keen. Often they heard nearby
Elvish voices singing, and knew that they were making songs of lam-
entation for his fall, for they caught his name among the sweet sad
words that they could not understand.
Mithrandir, Mithrandir sang the Elves, O Pilgrim Grey! For so they
loved to call him. But if Legolas was with the Company, he would not
interpret the songs for them, saying that he had not the skill, and that
for him the grief was still too near, a matter for tears and not yet for
song.
It was Frodo who ﬁrst put something of his sorrow into halting
words. He was seldom moved to make song or rhyme; even in Riven-
dell he had listened and had not sung himself, though his memory
was stored with many things that others had made before him. But
now as he sat beside the fountain in Lo´ rien and heard about him the
voices of the Elves, his thought took shape in a song that seemed fair
to him; yet when he tried to repeat it to Sam only snatches remained,
faded as a handful of withered leaves.
When evening in the Shire was grey
his footsteps on the Hill were heard;
before the dawn he went away
on journey long without a word.
From Wilderland to Western shore,
from northern waste to southern hill,
through dragon-lair and hidden door
and darkling woods he walked at will.
With Dwarf and Hobbit, Elves and Men,
with mortal and immortal folk,
with bird on bough and beast in den,
in their own secret tongues he spoke.

A deadly sword, a healing hand,
a back that bent beneath its load;
a trumpet-voice, a burning brand,
a weary pilgrim on the road.
A lord of wisdom throned he sat,
swift in anger, quick to laugh;
an old man in a battered hat
who leaned upon a thorny staff.
He stood upon the bridge alone
and Fire and Shadow both deﬁed;
his staff was broken on the stone,
in Khazad-duˆ m his wisdom died.
‘Why, you’ll be beating Mr. Bilbo next!’ said Sam.
‘No, I am afraid not,’ said Frodo. ‘But that is the best I can do
yet.’
‘Well, Mr. Frodo, if you do have another go, I hope you’ll say a
word about his ﬁreworks,’ said Sam. ‘Something like this:
The ﬁnest rockets ever seen:
they burst in stars of blue and green,
or after thunder golden showers
came falling like a rain of ﬂowers.
Though that doesn’t do them justice by a long road.’
‘No, I’ll leave that to you, Sam. Or perhaps to Bilbo. But – well,
I can’t talk of it any more. I can’t bear to think of bringing the news
to him.’
One evening Frodo and Sam were walking together in the cool
twilight. Both of them felt restless again. On Frodo suddenly the
shadow of parting had fallen: he knew somehow that the time was
very near when he must leave Lothlo´rien.
‘What do you think of Elves now, Sam?’ he said. ‘I asked you the
same question once before – it seems a very long while ago; but you
have seen more of them since then.’
‘I have indeed!’ said Sam. ‘And I reckon there’s Elves and Elves.
They’re all Elvish enough, but they’re not all the same. Now these
folk aren’t wanderers or homeless, and seem a bit nearer to the likes
of us: they seem to belong here, more even than Hobbits do in the
Shire. Whether they’ve made the land, or the land’s made them, it’s
hard to say, if you take my meaning. It’s wonderfully quiet here.

Nothing seems to be going on, and nobody seems to want it to. If
there’s any magic about, it’s right down deep, where I can’t lay my
hands on it, in a manner of speaking.’
‘You can see and feel it everywhere,’ said Frodo.
‘Well,’ said Sam, ‘you can’t see nobody working it. No ﬁreworks
like poor old Gandalf used to show. I wonder we don’t see nothing
of the Lord and Lady in all these days. I fancy now that she could
do some wonderful things, if she had a mind. I’d dearly love to see
some Elf-magic, Mr. Frodo!’
‘I wouldn’t,’ said Frodo. ‘I am content. And I don’t miss Gandalf ’s
ﬁreworks, but his bushy eyebrows, and his quick temper, and his
voice.’
‘You’re right,’ said Sam. ‘And don’t think I’m ﬁnding fault. I’ve
often wanted to see a bit of magic like what it tells of in old tales,
but I’ve never heard of a better land than this. It’s like being at home
and on a holiday at the same time, if you understand me. I don’t
want to leave. All the same, I’m beginning to feel that if we’ve got
to go on, then we’d best get it over.
‘It’s the job that’s never started as takes longest to ﬁnish, as my old
gaffer used to say. And I don’t reckon that these folk can do much
more to help us, magic or no. It’s when we leave this land that we
shall miss Gandalf worse, I’m thinking.’
‘I am afraid that’s only too true, Sam,’ said Frodo. ‘Yet I hope
very much that before we leave we shall see the Lady of the Elves
again.’
Even as he spoke, they saw, as if she came in answer to their
words, the Lady Galadriel approaching. Tall and white and fair she
walked beneath the trees. She spoke no word, but beckoned to them.
Turning aside, she led them towards the southern slopes of the
hill of Caras Galadhon, and passing through a high green hedge they
came into an enclosed garden. No trees grew there, and it lay open
to the sky. The evening star had risen and was shining with white
ﬁre above the western woods. Down a long ﬂight of steps the Lady
went into the deep green hollow, through which ran murmuring the
silver stream that issued from the fountain on the hill. At the bottom,
upon a low pedestal carved like a branching tree, stood a basin of
silver, wide and shallow, and beside it stood a silver ewer.
With water from the stream Galadriel ﬁlled the basin to the brim,
and breathed on it, and when the water was still again she spoke.
‘Here is the Mirror of Galadriel,’ she said. ‘I have brought you here
so that you may look in it, if you will.’
The air was very still, and the dell was dark, and the Elf-lady
beside him was tall and pale. ‘What shall we look for, and what shall
we see?’ asked Frodo, ﬁlled with awe.

‘Many things I can command the Mirror to reveal,’ she answered,
‘and to some I can show what they desire to see. But the Mirror will
also show things unbidden, and those are often stranger and more
proﬁtable than things which we wish to behold. What you will see,
if you leave the Mirror free to work, I cannot tell. For it shows things
that were, and things that are, and things that yet may be. But which
it is that he sees, even the wisest cannot always tell. Do you wish to
look?’
Frodo did not answer.
‘And you?’ she said, turning to Sam. ‘For this is what your folk
would call magic, I believe; though I do not understand clearly what
they mean; and they seem to use the same word of the deceits of the
Enemy. But this, if you will, is the magic of Galadriel. Did you not
say that you wished to see Elf-magic?’
‘I did,’ said Sam, trembling a little between fear and curiosity. ‘I’ll
have a peep, Lady, if you’re willing.
‘And I’d not mind a glimpse of what’s going on at home,’ he said
in an aside to Frodo. ‘It seems a terrible long time that I’ve been
away. But there, like as not I’ll only see the stars, or something that
I won’t understand.’
‘Like as not,’ said the Lady with a gentle laugh. ‘But come, you
shall look and see what you may. Do not touch the water!’
Sam climbed up on the foot of the pedestal and leaned over
the basin. The water looked hard and dark. Stars were reﬂected
in it.
‘There’s only stars, as I thought,’ he said. Then he gave a low
gasp, for the stars went out. As if a dark veil had been withdrawn,
the Mirror grew grey, and then clear. There was sun shining, and
the branches of trees were waving and tossing in the wind. But before
Sam could make up his mind what it was that he saw, the light faded;
and now he thought he saw Frodo with a pale face lying fast asleep
under a great dark cliff. Then he seemed to see himself going along
a dim passage, and climbing an endless winding stair. It came to him
suddenly that he was looking urgently for something, but what it was
he did not know. Like a dream the vision shifted and went back, and
he saw the trees again. But this time they were not so close, and he
could see what was going on: they were not waving in the wind, they
were falling, crashing to the ground.
‘Hi!’ cried Sam in an outraged voice. ‘There’s that Ted Sandyman
a-cutting down trees as he shouldn’t. They didn’t ought to be felled:
it’s that avenue beyond the Mill that shades the road to Bywater.
I wish I could get at Ted, and I’d fell him!’
But now Sam noticed that the Old Mill had vanished, and a large
red-brick building was being put up where it had stood. Lots of folk

were busily at work. There was a tall red chimney nearby. Black
smoke seemed to cloud the surface of the Mirror.
‘There’s some devilry at work in the Shire,’ he said. ‘Elrond knew
what he was about when he wanted to send Mr. Merry back.’ Then
suddenly Sam gave a cry and sprang away. ‘I can’t stay here,’ he said
wildly. ‘I must go home. They’ve dug up Bagshot Row, and there’s
the poor old Gaffer going down the Hill with his bits of things on a
barrow. I must go home!’
‘You cannot go home alone,’ said the Lady. ‘You did not wish to
go home without your master before you looked in the Mirror, and
yet you knew that evil things might well be happening in the Shire.
Remember that the Mirror shows many things, and not all have yet
come to pass. Some never come to be, unless those that behold the
visions turn aside from their path to prevent them. The Mirror is
dangerous as a guide of deeds.’
Sam sat on the ground and put his head in his hands. ‘I wish I
had never come here, and I don’t want to see no more magic,’
he said and fell silent. After a moment he spoke again thickly,
as if struggling with tears. ‘No, I’ll go home by the long road with
Mr. Frodo, or not at all,’ he said. ‘But I hope I do get back some
day. If what I’ve seen turns out true, somebody’s going to catch it
hot!’
‘Do you now wish to look, Frodo?’ said the Lady Galadriel. ‘You
did not wish to see Elf-magic and were content.’
‘Do you advise me to look?’ asked Frodo.
‘No,’ she said. ‘I do not counsel you one way or the other. I am
not a counsellor. You may learn something, and whether what you
see be fair or evil, that may be proﬁtable, and yet it may not. Seeing
is both good and perilous. Yet I think, Frodo, that you have courage
and wisdom enough for the venture, or I would not have brought
you here. Do as you will!’
‘I will look,’ said Frodo, and he climbed on the pedestal and bent
over the dark water. At once the Mirror cleared and he saw a twilit
land. Mountains loomed dark in the distance against a pale sky. A
long grey road wound back out of sight. Far away a ﬁgure came
slowly down the road, faint and small at ﬁrst, but growing larger and
clearer as it approached. Suddenly Frodo realized that it reminded
him of Gandalf. He almost called aloud the wizard’s name, and then
he saw that the ﬁgure was clothed not in grey but in white, in a white
that shone faintly in the dusk; and in its hand there was a white staff.
The head was so bowed that he could see no face, and presently the
ﬁgure turned aside round a bend in the road and went out of the
Mirror’s view. Doubt came into Frodo’s mind: was this a vision of

Gandalf on one of his many lonely journeys long ago, or was it
Saruman?
The vision now changed. Brief and small but very vivid he caught
a glimpse of Bilbo walking restlessly about his room. The table was
littered with disordered papers; rain was beating on the windows.
Then there was a pause, and after it many swift scenes followed
that Frodo in some way knew to be parts of a great history in which
he had become involved. The mist cleared and he saw a sight which
he had never seen before but knew at once: the Sea. Darkness fell.
The sea rose and raged in a great storm. Then he saw against the
Sun, sinking blood-red into a wrack of clouds, the black outline of
a tall ship with torn sails riding up out of the West. Then a wide
river ﬂowing through a populous city. Then a white fortress with
seven towers. And then again a ship with black sails, but now it was
morning again, and the water rippled with light, and a banner bearing
the emblem of a white tree shone in the sun. A smoke as of ﬁre and
battle arose, and again the sun went down in a burning red that faded
into a grey mist; and into the mist a small ship passed away, twinkling
with lights. It vanished, and Frodo sighed and prepared to draw away.
But suddenly the Mirror went altogether dark, as dark as if a hole
had opened in the world of sight, and Frodo looked into emptiness.
In the black abyss there appeared a single Eye that slowly grew, until
it ﬁlled nearly all the Mirror. So terrible was it that Frodo stood
rooted, unable to cry out or to withdraw his gaze. The Eye was
rimmed with ﬁre, but was itself glazed, yellow as a cat’s, watchful
and intent, and the black slit of its pupil opened on a pit, a window
into nothing.
Then the Eye began to rove, searching this way and that; and
Frodo knew with certainty and horror that among the many things
that it sought he himself was one. But he also knew that it could not
see him – not yet, not unless he willed it. The Ring that hung upon
its chain about his neck grew heavy, heavier than a great stone, and
his head was dragged downwards. The Mirror seemed to be growing
hot and curls of steam were rising from the water. He was slipping
forward.
‘Do not touch the water!’ said the Lady Galadriel softly. The vision
faded, and Frodo found that he was looking at the cool stars twinkling
in the silver basin. He stepped back shaking all over and looked at
the Lady.
‘I know what it was that you last saw,’ she said; ‘for that is also
in my mind. Do not be afraid! But do not think that only by singing
amid the trees, nor even by the slender arrows of elven-bows, is this
land of Lothlo´ rien maintained and defended against its Enemy. I say
to you, Frodo, that even as I speak to you, I perceive the Dark Lord

and know his mind, or all of his mind that concerns the Elves. And
he gropes ever to see me and my thought. But still the door is closed!’
She lifted up her white arms, and spread out her hands towards
the East in a gesture of rejection and denial. Ea¨rendil, the Evening
Star, most beloved of the Elves, shone clear above. So bright was it
that the ﬁgure of the Elven-lady cast a dim shadow on the ground.
Its rays glanced upon a ring about her ﬁnger; it glittered like polished
gold overlaid with silver light, and a white stone in it twinkled as if
the Even-star had come down to rest upon her hand. Frodo gazed at
the ring with awe; for suddenly it seemed to him that he understood.
‘Yes,’ she said, divining his thought, ‘it is not permitted to speak
of it, and Elrond could not do so. But it cannot be hidden from the
Ring-bearer, and one who has seen the Eye. Verily it is in the land
of Lo´ rien upon the ﬁnger of Galadriel that one of the Three remains.
This is Nenya, the Ring of Adamant, and I am its keeper.
‘He suspects, but he does not know – not yet. Do you not see
now wherefore your coming is to us as the footstep of Doom? For if
you fail, then we are laid bare to the Enemy. Yet if you succeed, then
our power is diminished, and Lothlo´rien will fade, and the tides of
Time will sweep it away. We must depart into the West, or dwindle
to a rustic folk of dell and cave, slowly to forget and to be forgotten.’
Frodo bent his head. ‘And what do you wish?’ he said at last.
‘That what should be shall be,’ she answered. ‘The love of the
Elves for their land and their works is deeper than the deeps of the
Sea, and their regret is undying and cannot ever wholly be assuaged.
Yet they will cast all away rather than submit to Sauron: for they
know him now. For the fate of Lothlo´ rien you are not answerable,
but only for the doing of your own task. Yet I could wish, were it of
any avail, that the One Ring had never been wrought, or had remained
for ever lost.’
‘You are wise and fearless and fair, Lady Galadriel,’ said Frodo.
‘I will give you the One Ring, if you ask for it. It is too great a matter
for me.’
Galadriel laughed with a sudden clear laugh. ‘Wise the Lady
Galadriel may be,’ she said, ‘yet here she has met her match in courtesy.
Gently are you revenged for my testing of your heart at our ﬁrst
meeting. You begin to see with a keen eye. I do not deny that my
heart has greatly desired to ask what you offer. For many long years
I had pondered what I might do, should the Great Ring come into
my hands, and behold! it was brought within my grasp. The evil that
was devised long ago works on in many ways, whether Sauron himself
stands or falls. Would not that have been a noble deed to set to the
credit of his Ring, if I had taken it by force or fear from my guest?
‘And now at last it comes. You will give me the Ring freely! In

place of the Dark Lord you will set up a Queen. And I shall not be
dark, but beautiful and terrible as the Morning and the Night! Fair
as the Sea and the Sun and the Snow upon the Mountain! Dreadful
as the Storm and the Lightning! Stronger than the foundations of
the earth. All shall love me and despair!’
She lifted up her hand and from the ring that she wore there issued
a great light that illumined her alone and left all else dark. She stood
before Frodo seeming now tall beyond measurement, and beautiful
beyond enduring, terrible and worshipful. Then she let her hand fall,
and the light faded, and suddenly she laughed again, and lo! she was
shrunken: a slender elf-woman, clad in simple white, whose gentle
voice was soft and sad.
‘I pass the test,’ she said. ‘I will diminish, and go into the West,
and remain Galadriel.’
They stood for a long while in silence. At length the Lady spoke
again. ‘Let us return!’ she said. ‘In the morning you must depart, for
now we have chosen, and the tides of fate are ﬂowing.’
‘I would ask one thing before we go,’ said Frodo, ‘a thing which
I often meant to ask Gandalf in Rivendell. I am permitted to wear
the One Ring: why cannot I see all the others and know the thoughts
of those that wear them?’
‘You have not tried,’ she said. ‘Only thrice have you set the Ring
upon your ﬁnger since you knew what you possessed. Do not try! It
would destroy you. Did not Gandalf tell you that the rings give power
according to the measure of each possessor? Before you could use
that power you would need to become far stronger, and to train your
will to the domination of others. Yet even so, as Ring-bearer and as
one that has borne it on ﬁnger and seen that which is hidden, your
sight is grown keener. You have perceived my thought more clearly
than many that are accounted wise. You saw the Eye of him that
holds the Seven and the Nine. And did you not see and recognize
the ring upon my ﬁnger? Did you see my ring?’ she asked turning
again to Sam.
‘No, Lady,’ he answered. ‘To tell you the truth, I wondered what
you were talking about. I saw a star through your ﬁngers. But if you’ll
pardon my speaking out, I think my master was right. I wish you’d
take his Ring. You’d put things to rights. You’d stop them digging
up the Gaffer and turning him adrift. You’d make some folk pay for
their dirty work.’
‘I would,’ she said. ‘That is how it would begin. But it would not
stop with that, alas! We will not speak more of it. Let us go!’

Chapter 8
´
F A R E W E L L  T O  L O R I E N
That night the Company was again summoned to the chamber of
Celeborn, and there the Lord and Lady greeted them with fair words.
At length Celeborn spoke of their departure.
‘Now is the time,’ he said, ‘when those who wish to continue the
Quest must harden their hearts to leave this land. Those who no
longer wish to go forward may remain here, for a while. But whether
they stay or go, none can be sure of peace. For we are come now
to the edge of doom. Here those who wish may await the oncoming
of the hour till either the ways of the world lie open again, or we
summon them to the last need of Lo´rien. Then they may return to
their own lands, or else go to the long home of those that fall in
battle.’
There was a silence. ‘They all resolved to go forward,’ said Galadriel
looking in their eyes.
‘As for me,’ said Boromir, ‘my way home lies onward and not
back.’
‘That is true,’ said Celeborn, ‘but is all this Company going with
you to Minas Tirith?’
‘We have not decided our course,’ said Aragorn. ‘Beyond Lothlo´r-
ien I do not know what Gandalf intended to do. Indeed I do not
think that even he had any clear purpose.’
‘Maybe not,’ said Celeborn, ‘yet when you leave this land, you
can no longer forget the Great River. As some of you know well, it
cannot be crossed by travellers with baggage between Lo´ rien and
Gondor, save by boat. And are not the bridges of Osgiliath broken
down and all the landings held now by the Enemy?
‘On which side will you journey? The way to Minas Tirith lies upon
this side, upon the west; but the straight road of the Quest lies east of
the River, upon the darker shore. Which shore will you now take?’
‘If my advice is heeded, it will be the western shore, and the way
to Minas Tirith,’ answered Boromir. ‘But I am not the leader of the
Company.’ The others said nothing, and Aragorn looked doubtful
and troubled.
‘I see that you do not yet know what to do,’ said Celeborn. ‘It is
not my part to choose for you; but I will help you as I may. There
are some among you who can handle boats: Legolas, whose folk know
the swift Forest River; and Boromir of Gondor; and Aragorn the
traveller.’

‘And one Hobbit!’ cried Merry. ‘Not all of us look on boats as
wild horses. My people live by the banks of the Brandywine.’
‘That is well,’ said Celeborn. ‘Then I will furnish your Company
with boats. They must be small and light, for if you go far by water,
there are places where you will be forced to carry them. You will
come to the rapids of Sarn Gebir, and maybe at last to the great falls
of Rauros where the River thunders down from Nen Hithoel; and
there are other perils. Boats may make your journey less toilsome for
a while. Yet they will not give you counsel: in the end you must leave
them and the River, and turn west – or east.’
Aragorn thanked Celeborn many times. The gift of boats com-
forted him much, not least because there would now be no need to
decide his course for some days. The others, too, looked more hope-
ful. Whatever perils lay ahead, it seemed better to ﬂoat down the
broad tide of Anduin to meet them than to plod forward with bent
backs. Only Sam was doubtful: he at any rate still thought boats as
bad as wild horses, or worse, and not all the dangers that he had
survived made him think better of them.
‘All shall be prepared for you and await you at the haven before
noon tomorrow,’ said Celeborn. ‘I will send my people to you in the
morning to help you make ready for the journey. Now we will wish
you all a fair night and untroubled sleep.’
‘Good night, my friends!’ said Galadriel. ‘Sleep in peace! Do not
trouble your hearts overmuch with thought of the road tonight.
Maybe the paths that you each shall tread are already laid before
your feet, though you do not see them. Good night!’
The Company now took their leave and returned to their pavilion.
Legolas went with them, for this was to be their last night in Loth-
lo´ rien, and in spite of the words of Galadriel they wished to take
counsel together.
For a long time they debated what they should do, and how it
would be best to attempt the fulﬁlling of their purpose with the Ring;
but they came to no decision. It was plain that most of them desired
to go ﬁrst to Minas Tirith, and to escape at least for a while from
the terror of the Enemy. They would have been willing to follow a
leader over the River and into the shadow of Mordor; but Frodo
spoke no word, and Aragorn was still divided in his mind.
His own plan, while Gandalf remained with them, had been to go
with Boromir, and with his sword help to deliver Gondor. For he
believed that the message of the dreams was a summons, and that
the hour had come at last when the heir of Elendil should come forth
and strive with Sauron for the mastery. But in Moria the burden of
Gandalf had been laid on him; and he knew that he could not now

forsake the Ring, if Frodo refused in the end to go with Boromir.
And yet what help could he or any of the Company give to Frodo,
save to walk blindly with him into the darkness?
‘I shall go to Minas Tirith, alone if need be, for it is my duty,’
said Boromir; and after that he was silent for a while, sitting with his
eyes ﬁxed on Frodo, as if he was trying to read the Halﬂing’s thoughts.
At length he spoke again, softly, as if he was debating with himself.
‘If you wish only to destroy the Ring,’ he said, ‘then there is little
use in war and weapons; and the Men of Minas Tirith cannot help.
But if you wish to destroy the armed might of the Dark Lord, then
it is folly to go without force into his domain; and folly to throw
away.’ He paused suddenly, as if he had become aware that he was
speaking his thoughts aloud. ‘It would be folly to throw lives away,
I mean,’ he ended. ‘It is a choice between defending a strong place
and walking openly into the arms of death. At least, that is how I
see it.’
Frodo caught something new and strange in Boromir’s glance,
and he looked hard at him. Plainly Boromir’s thought was different
from his ﬁnal words. It would be folly to throw away: what? The
Ring of Power? He had said something like this at the Council, but
then he had accepted the correction of Elrond. Frodo looked at
Aragorn, but he seemed deep in his own thought and made no sign
that he had heeded Boromir’s words. And so their debate ended.
Merry and Pippin were already asleep, and Sam was nodding. The
night was growing old.
In the morning, as they were beginning to pack their slender goods,
Elves that could speak their tongue came to them and brought them
many gifts of food and clothing for the journey. The food was mostly
in the form of very thin cakes, made of a meal that was baked a light
brown on the outside, and inside was the colour of cream. Gimli
took up one of the cakes and looked at it with a doubtful eye.
‘Cram,’ he said under his breath, as he broke off a crisp corner
and nibbled at it. His expression quickly changed, and he ate all the
rest of the cake with relish.
‘No more, no more!’ cried the Elves laughing. ‘You have eaten
enough already for a long day’s march.’
‘I thought it was only a kind of cram, such as the Dale-men make
for journeys in the wild,’ said the Dwarf.
‘So it is,’ they answered. ‘But we call it lembas or waybread, and
it is more strengthening than any food made by Men, and it is more
pleasant than cram, by all accounts.’
‘Indeed it is,’ said Gimli. ‘Why, it is better than the honey-cakes
of the Beornings, and that is great praise, for the Beornings are the

best bakers that I know of; but they are none too willing to deal out
their cakes to travellers in these days. You are kindly hosts!’
‘All the same, we bid you spare the food,’ they said. ‘Eat little at
a time, and only at need. For these things are given to serve you
when all else fails. The cakes will keep sweet for many many days,
if they are unbroken and left in their leaf-wrappings, as we have
brought them. One will keep a traveller on his feet for a day of long
labour, even if he be one of the tall Men of Minas Tirith.’
The Elves next unwrapped and gave to each of the Company the
clothes they had brought. For each they had provided a hood and
cloak, made according to his size, of the light but warm silken stuff
that the Galadhrim wove. It was hard to say of what colour they
were: grey with the hue of twilight under the trees they seemed to
be; and yet if they were moved, or set in another light, they were green
as shadowed leaves, or brown as fallow ﬁelds by night, dusk-silver as
water under the stars. Each cloak was fastened about the neck with
a brooch like a green leaf veined with silver.
‘Are these magic cloaks?’ asked Pippin, looking at them with
wonder.
‘I do not know what you mean by that,’ answered the leader of
the Elves. ‘They are fair garments, and the web is good, for it was
made in this land. They are Elvish robes certainly, if that is what you
mean. Leaf and branch, water and stone: they have the hue and
beauty of all these things under the twilight of Lo´ rien that we love;
for we put the thought of all that we love into all that we make. Yet
they are garments, not armour, and they will not turn shaft or blade.
But they should serve you well: they are light to wear, and warm
enough or cool enough at need. And you will ﬁnd them a great aid
in keeping out of the sight of unfriendly eyes, whether you walk
among the stones or the trees. You are indeed high in the favour of
the Lady! For she herself and her maidens wove this stuff; and never
before have we clad strangers in the garb of our own people.’
After their morning meal the Company said farewell to the lawn
by the fountain. Their hearts were heavy; for it was a fair place, and
it had become like home to them, though they could not count the
days and nights that they had passed there. As they stood for a
moment looking at the white water in the sunlight, Haldir came
walking towards them over the green grass of the glade. Frodo greeted
him with delight.
‘I have returned from the Northern Fences,’ said the Elf, ‘and I
am sent now to be your guide again. The Dimrill Dale is full of
vapour and clouds of smoke, and the mountains are troubled. There
are noises in the deeps of the earth. If any of you had thought of

returning northwards to your homes, you would not have been able
to pass that way. But come! Your path now goes south.’
As they walked through Caras Galadhon the green ways were
empty; but in the trees above them many voices were murmuring
and singing. They themselves went silently. At last Haldir led them
down the southward slopes of the hill, and they came again to the
great gate hung with lamps, and to the white bridge; and so they
passed out and left the city of the Elves. Then they turned away from
the paved road and took a path that went off into a deep thicket of
mallorn-trees, and passed on, winding through rolling woodlands of
silver shadow, leading them ever down, southwards and eastwards,
towards the shores of the River.
They had gone some ten miles and noon was at hand when they
came on a high green wall. Passing through an opening they came
suddenly out of the trees. Before them lay a long lawn of shining
grass, studded with golden elanor that glinted in the sun. The lawn
ran out into a narrow tongue between bright margins: on the right
and west the Silverlode ﬂowed glittering; on the left and east the
Great River rolled its broad waters, deep and dark. On the further
shores the woodlands still marched on southwards as far as eye could
see, but all the banks were bleak and bare. No mallorn lifted its
gold-hung boughs beyond the Land of Lo´rien.
On the bank of the Silverlode, at some distance up from the meet-
ing of the streams, there was a hythe of white stones and white
wood. By it were moored many boats and barges. Some were brightly
painted, and shone with silver and gold and green, but most were
either white or grey. Three small grey boats had been made ready
for the travellers, and in these the Elves stowed their goods. And
they added also coils of rope, three to each boat. Slender they looked,
but strong, silken to the touch, grey of hue like the elven-cloaks.
‘What are these?’ asked Sam, handling one that lay upon the
greensward.
‘Ropes indeed!’ answered an Elf from the boats. ‘Never travel far
without a rope! And one that is long and strong and light. Such are
these. They may be a help in many needs.’
‘You don’t need to tell me that!’ said Sam. ‘I came without any,
and I’ve been worried ever since. But I was wondering what these
were made of, knowing a bit about rope-making: it’s in the family as
you might say.’
‘They are made of hithlain,’ said the Elf, ‘but there is no time now
to instruct you in the art of their making. Had we known that this
craft delighted you, we could have taught you much. But now alas!
unless you should at some time return hither, you must be content
with our gift. May it serve you well!’

‘Come!’ said Haldir. ‘All is now ready for you. Enter the boats!
But take care at ﬁrst!’
‘Heed the words!’ said the other Elves. ‘These boats are light-built,
and they are crafty and unlike the boats of other folk. They will not
sink, lade them as you will; but they are wayward if mishandled. It
would be wise if you accustomed yourselves to stepping in and out,
here where there is a landing-place, before you set off downstream.’
The Company was arranged in this way: Aragorn, Frodo, and Sam
were in one boat; Boromir, Merry, and Pippin in another; and in the
third were Legolas and Gimli, who had now become fast friends. In
this last boat most of the goods and packs were stowed. The boats
were moved and steered with short-handled paddles that had broad
leaf-shaped blades. When all was ready Aragorn led them on a trial
up the Silverlode. The current was swift and they went forward
slowly. Sam sat in the bows, clutching the sides, and looking back
wistfully to the shore. The sunlight glittering on the water dazzled
his eyes. As they passed beyond the green ﬁeld of the Tongue, the
trees drew down to the river’s brink. Here and there golden leaves
tossed and ﬂoated on the rippling stream. The air was very bright
and still, and there was a silence, except for the high distant song of
larks.
They turned a sharp bend in the river, and there, sailing proudly
down the stream towards them, they saw a swan of great size. The
water rippled on either side of the white breast beneath its curving
neck. Its beak shone like burnished gold, and its eyes glinted like jet
set in yellow stones; its huge white wings were half lifted. A music
came down the river as it drew nearer; and suddenly they perceived
that it was a ship, wrought and carved with elven-skill in the likeness
of a bird. Two elves clad in white steered it with black paddles. In
the midst of the vessel sat Celeborn, and behind him stood Galadriel,
tall and white; a circlet of golden ﬂowers was in her hair, and in her
hand she held a harp, and she sang. Sad and sweet was the sound
of her voice in the cool clear air:
I sang of leaves, of leaves of gold, and leaves of gold there grew:
Of wind I sang, a wind there came and in the branches blew.
Beyond the Sun, beyond the Moon, the foam was on the Sea,
And by the strand of Ilmarin there grew a golden Tree.
Beneath the stars of Ever-eve in Eldamar it shone,
In Eldamar beside the walls of Elven Tirion.
There long the golden leaves have grown upon the branching
years,
While here beyond the Sundering Seas now fall the Elven-tears.

O Lo´rien! The Winter comes, the bare and leaﬂess Day;
The leaves are falling in the stream, the River ﬂows away.
O Lo´rien! Too long I have dwelt upon this Hither Shore
And in a fading crown have twined the golden elanor.
But if of ships I now should sing, what ship would come to me,
What ship would bear me ever back across so wide a Sea?
Aragorn stayed his boat as the Swan-ship drew alongside. The
Lady ended her song and greeted them. ‘We have come to bid our
last farewell,’ she said, ‘and to speed you with blessings from our
land.’
‘Though you have been our guests,’ said Celeborn, ‘you have not
yet eaten with us, and we bid you, therefore, to a parting feast, here
between the ﬂowing waters that will bear you far from Lo´ rien.’
The Swan passed on slowly to the hythe, and they turned their
boats and followed it. There in the last end of Egladil upon the
green grass the parting feast was held; but Frodo ate and drank little,
heeding only the beauty of the Lady and her voice. She seemed no
longer perilous or terrible, nor ﬁlled with hidden power. Already she
seemed to him, as by men of later days Elves still at times are seen:
present and yet remote, a living vision of that which has already been
left far behind by the ﬂowing streams of Time.
After they had eaten and drunk, sitting upon the grass, Celeborn
spoke to them again of their journey, and lifting his hand he pointed
south to the woods beyond the Tongue.
‘As you go down the water,’ he said, ‘you will ﬁnd that the trees
will fail, and you will come to a barren country. There the River
ﬂows in stony vales amid high moors, until at last after many leagues
it comes to the tall island of the Tindrock, that we call Tol Brandir.
There it casts its arms about the steep shores of the isle, and falls
then with a great noise and smoke over the cataracts of Rauros down
into the Nindalf, the Wetwang as it is called in your tongue. That is
a wide region of sluggish fen where the stream becomes tortuous and
much divided. There the Entwash ﬂows in by many mouths from
the Forest of Fangorn in the west. About that stream, on this side
of the Great River, lies Rohan. On the further side are the bleak hills
of the Emyn Muil. The wind blows from the East there, for they
look out over the Dead Marshes and the Noman-lands to Cirith
Gorgor and the black gates of Mordor.
‘Boromir, and any that go with him seeking Minas Tirith, will do
well to leave the Great River above Rauros and cross the Entwash
before it ﬁnds the marshes. Yet they should not go too far up that
stream, nor risk becoming entangled in the Forest of Fangorn. That

is a strange land, and is now little known. But Boromir and Aragorn
doubtless do not need this warning.’
‘Indeed we have heard of Fangorn in Minas Tirith,’ said Boromir.
‘But what I have heard seems to me for the most part old wives’
tales, such as we tell to our children. All that lies north of Rohan is
now to us so far away that fancy can wander freely there. Of old
Fangorn lay upon the borders of our realm; but it is now many lives
of men since any of us visited it, to prove or disprove the legends
that have come down from distant years.
‘I have myself been at whiles in Rohan, but I have never crossed
it northwards. When I was sent out as a messenger, I passed through
the Gap by the skirts of the White Mountains, and crossed the Isen
and the Greyﬂood into Northerland. A long and wearisome journey.
Four hundred leagues I reckoned it, and it took me many months;
for I lost my horse at Tharbad, at the fording of the Greyﬂood. After
that journey, and the road I have trodden with this Company, I do
not much doubt that I shall ﬁnd a way through Rohan, and Fangorn
too, if need be.’
‘Then I need say no more,’ said Celeborn. ‘But do not despise
the lore that has come down from distant years; for oft it may chance
that old wives keep in memory word of things that once were needful
for the wise to know.’
Now Galadriel rose from the grass, and taking a cup from one of
her maidens she ﬁlled it with white mead and gave it to Celeborn.
‘Now it is time to drink the cup of farewell,’ she said. ‘Drink, Lord
of the Galadhrim! And let not your heart be sad, though night must
follow noon, and already our evening draweth nigh.’
Then she brought the cup to each of the Company, and bade
them drink and farewell. But when they had drunk she commanded
them to sit again on the grass, and chairs were set for her and for
Celeborn. Her maidens stood silent about her, and a while she looked
upon her guests. At last she spoke again.
‘We have drunk the cup of parting,’ she said, ‘and the shadows
fall between us. But before you go, I have brought in my ship gifts
which the Lord and Lady of the Galadhrim now offer you in memory
of Lothlo´rien.’ Then she called to each in turn.
‘Here is the gift of Celeborn and Galadriel to the leader of your
Company,’ she said to Aragorn, and she gave him a sheath that had
been made to ﬁt his sword. It was overlaid with a tracery of ﬂowers
and leaves wrought of silver and gold, and on it were set in elven-runes
formed of many gems the name Andu´ril and the lineage of the sword.
‘The blade that is drawn from this sheath shall not be stained or
broken even in defeat,’ she said. ‘But is there aught else that you

desire of me at our parting? For darkness will ﬂow between us, and
it may be that we shall not meet again, unless it be far hence upon
a road that has no returning.’
And Aragorn answered: ‘Lady, you know all my desire, and long
held in keeping the only treasure that I seek. Yet it is not yours to
give me, even if you would; and only through darkness shall I come
to it.’
‘Yet maybe this will lighten your heart,’ said Galadriel; ‘for it was
left in my care to be given to you, should you pass through this land.’
Then she lifted from her lap a great stone of a clear green, set in a
silver brooch that was wrought in the likeness of an eagle with out-
spread wings; and as she held it up the gem ﬂashed like the sun
shining through the leaves of spring. ‘This stone I gave to Celebrı´an
my daughter, and she to hers; and now it comes to you as a token
of hope. In this hour take the name that was foretold for you, Elessar,
the Elfstone of the House of Elendil!’
Then Aragorn took the stone and pinned the brooch upon his breast,
and those who saw him wondered; for they had not marked before how
tall and kingly he stood, and it seemed to them that many years of toil
had fallen from his shoulders. ‘For the gifts that you have given me I
thank you,’ he said, ‘O Lady of Lo´rien of whom were sprung Celebrı´an
and Arwen Evenstar. What praise could I say more?’
The Lady bowed her head, and she turned then to Boromir, and
to him she gave a belt of gold; and to Merry and Pippin she gave
small silver belts, each with a clasp wrought like a golden ﬂower. To
Legolas she gave a bow such as the Galadhrim used, longer and
stouter than the bows of Mirkwood, and strung with a string of
elf-hair. With it went a quiver of arrows.
‘For you little gardener and lover of trees,’ she said to Sam, ‘I
have only a small gift.’ She put into his hand a little box of plain grey
wood, unadorned save for a single silver rune upon the lid. ‘Here is
set G for Galadriel,’ she said; ‘but also it may stand for garden in
your tongue. In this box there is earth from my orchard, and such
blessing as Galadriel has still to bestow is upon it. It will not keep
you on your road, nor defend you against any peril; but if you keep
it and see your home again at last, then perhaps it may reward you.
Though you should ﬁnd all barren and laid waste, there will be few
gardens in Middle-earth that will bloom like your garden, if you
sprinkle this earth there. Then you may remember Galadriel, and
catch a glimpse far off of Lo´rien, that you have seen only in our
winter. For our Spring and our Summer are gone by, and they will
never be seen on earth again save in memory.’
Sam went red to the ears and muttered something inaudible, as
he clutched the box and bowed as well as he could.

‘And what gift would a Dwarf ask of the Elves?’ said Galadriel,
turning to Gimli.
‘None, Lady,’ answered Gimli. ‘It is enough for me to have seen
the Lady of the Galadhrim, and to have heard her gentle words.’
‘Hear all ye Elves!’ she cried to those about her. ‘Let none say
again that Dwarves are grasping and ungracious! Yet surely, Gimli
son of Glo´ in, you desire something that I could give? Name it, I bid
you! You shall not be the only guest without a gift.’
‘There is nothing, Lady Galadriel,’ said Gimli, bowing low and
stammering. ‘Nothing, unless it might be – unless it is permitted to
ask, nay, to name a single strand of your hair, which surpasses the
gold of the earth as the stars surpass the gems of the mine. I do not
ask for such a gift. But you commanded me to name my desire.’
The Elves stirred and murmured with astonishment, and Celeborn
gazed at the Dwarf in wonder, but the Lady smiled. ‘It is said that
the skill of the Dwarves is in their hands rather than in their tongues,’
she said; ‘yet that is not true of Gimli. For none have ever made to
me a request so bold and yet so courteous. And how shall I refuse,
since I commanded him to speak? But tell me, what would you do
with such a gift?’
‘Treasure it, Lady,’ he answered, ‘in memory of your words to me
at our ﬁrst meeting. And if ever I return to the smithies of my home,
it shall be set in imperishable crystal to be an heirloom of my house,
and a pledge of good will between the Mountain and the Wood until
the end of days.’
Then the Lady unbraided one of her long tresses, and cut off three
golden hairs, and laid them in Gimli’s hand. ‘These words shall go
with the gift,’ she said. ‘I do not foretell, for all foretelling is now
vain: on the one hand lies darkness, and on the other only hope. But
if hope should not fail, then I say to you, Gimli son of Glo´ in, that
your hands shall ﬂow with gold, and yet over you gold shall have no
dominion.
‘And you, Ring-bearer,’ she said, turning to Frodo. ‘I come to you
last who are not last in my thoughts. For you I have prepared this.’
She held up a small crystal phial: it glittered as she moved it, and
rays of white light sprang from her hand. ‘In this phial,’ she said, ‘is
caught the light of Ea¨rendil’s star, set amid the waters of my fountain.
It will shine still brighter when night is about you. May it be a light
to you in dark places, when all other lights go out. Remember
Galadriel and her Mirror!’
Frodo took the phial, and for a moment as it shone between them,
he saw her again standing like a queen, great and beautiful, but no
longer terrible. He bowed, but found no words to say.
*
*
*

Now the Lady arose, and Celeborn led them back to the hythe.
A yellow noon lay on the green land of the Tongue, and the water
glittered with silver. All at last was made ready. The Company took
their places in the boats as before. Crying farewell, the Elves of Lo´ rien
with long grey poles thrust them out into the ﬂowing stream, and
the rippling waters bore them slowly away. The travellers sat still
without moving or speaking. On the green bank near to the very
point of the Tongue the Lady Galadriel stood alone and silent. As
they passed her they turned and their eyes watched her slowly ﬂoating
away from them. For so it seemed to them: Lo´ rien was slipping
backward, like a bright ship masted with enchanted trees, sailing on
to forgotten shores, while they sat helpless upon the margin of the
grey and leaﬂess world.
Even as they gazed, the Silverlode passed out into the currents of
the Great River, and their boats turned and began to speed south-
ward. Soon the white form of the Lady was small and distant. She
shone like a window of glass upon a far hill in the westering sun, or
as a remote lake seen from a mountain: a crystal fallen in the lap of
the land. Then it seemed to Frodo that she lifted her arms in a ﬁnal
farewell, and far but piercing-clear on the following wind came the
sound of her voice singing. But now she sang in the ancient tongue
of the Elves beyond the Sea, and he did not understand the words:
fair was the music, but it did not comfort him.
Yet as is the way of Elvish words, they remained graven in his
memory, and long afterwards he interpreted them, as well as he could:
the language was that of Elven-song and spoke of things little known
on Middle-earth.
Ai! laurie¨ lantar lassi su´rinen,
ye´ni u´no´time¨ ve ra´mar aldaron!
Ye´ni ve linte¨ yuldar ava´nier
mi oromardi lisse-miruvo´reva
Andu´ne¨ pella, Vardo tellumar
nu luini yassen tintilar i eleni
o´maryo aireta´ri-lı´rinen.
Sı´ man i yulma nin enquantuva?
An sı´ Tintalle¨ Varda Oiolosse¨o
ve fanyar ma´ryat Elenta´ri ortane¨,
ar ilye¨ tier undula´ve¨ lumbule¨;
ar sindano´riello caita mornie¨
i falmalinnar imbe¨ met, ar hı´sie¨
untu´pa Calaciryo mı´ri oiale¨.
Sı´ vanwa na´, Ro´mello vanwa, Valimar!

Nama´rie¨! Nai hiruvalye¨ Valimar.
Nai elye¨ hiruva. Nama´rie¨!
‘Ah! like gold fall the leaves in the wind, long years numberless as
the wings of trees! The years have passed like swift draughts of the
sweet mead in lofty halls beyond the West, beneath the blue vaults
of Varda wherein the stars tremble in the song of her voice, holy and
queenly. Who now shall reﬁll the cup for me? For now the Kindler,
Varda, the Queen of the Stars, from Mount Everwhite has uplifted
her hands like clouds, and all paths are drowned deep in shadow;
and out of a grey country darkness lies on the foaming waves between
us, and mist covers the jewels of Calacirya for ever. Now lost, lost
to those from the East is Valimar! Farewell! Maybe thou shalt ﬁnd
Valimar. Maybe even thou shalt ﬁnd it. Farewell!’ Varda is the name
of that Lady whom the Elves in these lands of exile name Elbereth.
Suddenly the River swept round a bend, and the banks rose upon
either side, and the light of Lo´rien was hidden. To that fair land
Frodo never came again.
The travellers now turned their faces to the journey; the sun was
before them, and their eyes were dazzled, for all were ﬁlled with tears.
Gimli wept openly.
‘I have looked the last upon that which was fairest,’ he said to
Legolas his companion. ‘Henceforward I will call nothing fair, unless
it be her gift.’ He put his hand to his breast.
‘Tell me, Legolas, why did I come on this Quest? Little did I know
where the chief peril lay! Truly Elrond spoke, saying that we could
not foresee what we might meet upon our road. Torment in the dark
was the danger that I feared, and it did not hold me back. But I
would not have come, had I known the danger of light and joy. Now
I have taken my worst wound in this parting, even if I were to go
this night straight to the Dark Lord. Alas for Gimli son of Glo´ in!’
‘Nay!’ said Legolas. ‘Alas for us all! And for all that walk the world
in these after-days. For such is the way of it: to ﬁnd and lose, as it
seems to those whose boat is on the running stream. But I count you
blessed, Gimli son of Glo´ in: for your loss you suffer of your own free
will, and you might have chosen otherwise. But you have not forsaken
your companions, and the least reward that you shall have is that the
memory of Lothlo´ rien shall remain ever clear and unstained in your
heart, and shall neither fade nor grow stale.’
‘Maybe,’ said Gimli; ‘and I thank you for your words. True words
doubtless; yet all such comfort is cold. Memory is not what the heart
desires. That is only a mirror, be it clear as Kheled-zaˆram. Or so says
the heart of Gimli the Dwarf. Elves may see things otherwise. Indeed

I have heard that for them memory is more like to the waking world
than to a dream. Not so for Dwarves.
‘But let us talk no more of it. Look to the boat! She is too low in
the water with all this baggage, and the Great River is swift. I do not
wish to drown my grief in cold water.’ He took up a paddle, and
steered towards the western bank, following Aragorn’s boat ahead,
which had already moved out of the middle stream.
So the Company went on their long way, down the wide hurrying
waters, borne ever southwards. Bare woods stalked along either bank,
and they could not see any glimpse of the lands behind. The breeze
died away and the River ﬂowed without a sound. No voice of bird
broke the silence. The sun grew misty as the day grew old, until it
gleamed in a pale sky like a high white pearl. Then it faded into the
West, and dusk came early, followed by a grey and starless night.
Far into the dark quiet hours they ﬂoated on, guiding their boats
under the overhanging shadows of the western woods. Great trees
passed by like ghosts, thrusting their twisted thirsty roots through
the mist down into the water. It was dreary and cold. Frodo sat and
listened to the faint lap and gurgle of the River fretting among the
tree-roots and driftwood near the shore, until his head nodded and
he fell into an uneasy sleep.

Chapter 9
T H E  G R E A T  R I V E R
Frodo was roused by Sam. He found that he was lying, well wrapped,
under tall grey-skinned trees in a quiet corner of the woodlands on
the west bank of the Great River, Anduin. He had slept the night
away, and the grey of morning was dim among the bare branches.
Gimli was busy with a small ﬁre near at hand.
They started again before the day was broad. Not that most of
the Company were eager to hurry southwards: they were content that
the decision, which they must make at latest when they came to
Rauros and the Tindrock Isle, still lay some days ahead; and they let
the River bear them on at its own pace, having no desire to hasten
towards the perils that lay beyond, whichever course they took in the
end. Aragorn let them drift with the stream as they wished, hus-
banding their strength against weariness to come. But he insisted
that at least they should start early each day and journey on far into
the evening; for he felt in his heart that time was pressing, and he
feared that the Dark Lord had not been idle while they lingered in
Lo´ rien.
Nonetheless they saw no sign of any enemy that day, nor the next.
The dull grey hours passed without event. As the third day of their
voyage wore on the lands changed slowly: the trees thinned and then
failed altogether. On the eastern bank to their left they saw long
formless slopes stretching up and away towards the sky; brown and
withered they looked, as if ﬁre had passed over them, leaving no
living blade of green: an unfriendly waste without even a broken tree
or a bold stone to relieve the emptiness. They had come to the Brown
Lands that lay, vast and desolate, between Southern Mirkwood and
the hills of the Emyn Muil. What pestilence or war or evil deed of
the Enemy had so blasted all that region even Aragorn could not tell.
Upon the west to their right the land was treeless also, but it was
ﬂat, and in many places green with wide plains of grass. On this side
of the River they passed forests of great reeds, so tall that they shut
out all view to the west, as the little boats went rustling by along
their ﬂuttering borders. Their dark withered plumes bent and tossed
in the light cold airs, hissing softly and sadly. Here and there through
openings Frodo could catch sudden glimpses of rolling meads, and
far beyond them hills in the sunset, and away on the edge of sight
a dark line, where marched the southernmost ranks of the Misty
Mountains.

There was no sign of living moving things, save birds. Of these
there were many: small fowl whistling and piping in the reeds, but
they were seldom seen. Once or twice the travellers heard the rush
and whine of swan-wings, and looking up they saw a great phalanx
streaming along the sky.
‘Swans!’ said Sam. ‘And mighty big ones too!’
‘Yes,’ said Aragorn, ‘and they are black swans.’
‘How wide and empty and mournful all this country looks!’ said
Frodo. ‘I always imagined that as one journeyed south it got warmer
and merrier, until winter was left behind for ever.’
‘But we have not journeyed far south yet,’ answered Aragorn. ‘It
is still winter, and we are far from the sea. Here the world is cold
until the sudden spring, and we may yet have snow again. Far away
down in the Bay of Belfalas, to which Anduin runs, it is warm and
merry, maybe, or would be but for the Enemy. But here we are not
above sixty leagues, I guess, south of the Southfarthing away in your
Shire, hundreds of long miles yonder. You are looking now south-
west across the north plains of the Riddermark, Rohan the land of
the Horse-lords. Ere long we shall come to the mouth of the Limlight
that runs down from Fangorn to join the Great River. That is the
north boundary of Rohan; and of old all that lay between Limlight
and the White Mountains belonged to the Rohirrim. It is a rich and
pleasant land, and its grass has no rival; but in these evil days folk
do not dwell by the River or ride often to its shores. Anduin is wide,
yet the orcs can shoot their arrows far across the stream; and of late,
it is said, they have dared to cross the water and raid the herds and
studs of Rohan.’
Sam looked from bank to bank uneasily. The trees had seemed
hostile before, as if they harboured secret eyes and lurking dangers;
now he wished that the trees were still there. He felt that the Company
was too naked, aﬂoat in little open boats in the midst of shelterless
lands, and on a river that was the frontier of war.
In the next day or two, as they went on, borne steadily southwards,
this feeling of insecurity grew on all the Company. For a whole day
they took to their paddles and hastened forward. The banks slid by.
Soon the River broadened and grew more shallow; long stony beaches
lay upon the east, and there were gravel-shoals in the water, so that
careful steering was needed. The Brown Lands rose into bleak wolds,
over which ﬂowed a chill air from the East. On the other side the
meads had become rolling downs of withered grass amidst a land of
fen and tussock. Frodo shivered, thinking of the lawns and fountains,
the clear sun and gentle rains of Lothlo´ rien. There was little speech
and no laughter in any of the boats. Each member of the Company
was busy with his own thoughts.

The heart of Legolas was running under the stars of a summer
night in some northern glade amid the beech-woods; Gimli was
ﬁngering gold in his mind, and wondering if it were ﬁt to be wrought
into the housing of the Lady’s gift. Merry and Pippin in the middle
boat were ill at ease, for Boromir sat muttering to himself, sometimes
biting his nails, as if some restlessness or doubt consumed him, some-
times seizing a paddle and driving the boat close behind Aragorn’s.
Then Pippin, who sat in the bow looking back, caught a queer gleam
in his eye, as he peered forward gazing at Frodo. Sam had long ago
made up his mind that, though boats were maybe not as dangerous
as he had been brought up to believe, they were far more uncomfort-
able than even he had imagined. He was cramped and miserable,
having nothing to do but stare at the winter-lands crawling by and
the grey water on either side of him. Even when the paddles were in
use they did not trust Sam with one.
As dusk drew down on the fourth day, he was looking back over
the bowed heads of Frodo and Aragorn and the following boats; he
was drowsy and longed for camp and the feel of earth under his toes.
Suddenly something caught his sight: at ﬁrst he stared at it listlessly,
then he sat up and rubbed his eyes; but when he looked again he
could not see it any more.
That night they camped on a small eyot close to the western bank.
Sam lay rolled in blankets beside Frodo. ‘I had a funny dream an
hour or two before we stopped, Mr. Frodo,’ he said. ‘Or maybe it
wasn’t a dream. Funny it was anyway.’
‘Well, what was it?’ said Frodo, knowing that Sam would not settle
down until he had told his tale, whatever it was. ‘I haven’t seen or
thought of anything to make me smile since we left Lothlo´ rien.’
‘It wasn’t funny that way, Mr. Frodo. It was queer. All wrong, if
it wasn’t a dream. And you had best hear it. It was like this: I saw a
log with eyes!’
‘The log’s all right,’ said Frodo. ‘There are many in the River.
But leave out the eyes!’
‘That I won’t,’ said Sam. ‘’Twas the eyes as made me sit up, so
to speak. I saw what I took to be a log ﬂoating along in the half-light
behind Gimli’s boat; but I didn’t give much heed to it. Then it
seemed as if the log was slowly catching us up. And that was peculiar,
as you might say, seeing as we were all ﬂoating on the stream together.
Just then I saw the eyes: two pale sort of points, shiny-like, on a
hump at the near end of the log. What’s more, it wasn’t a log, for it
had paddle-feet, like a swan’s almost, only they seemed bigger, and
kept dipping in and out of the water.
‘That’s when I sat right up and rubbed my eyes, meaning to give

a shout, if it was still there when I had rubbed the drowse out of my
head. For the whatever-it-was was coming along fast now and getting
close behind Gimli. But whether those two lamps spotted me moving
and staring, or whether I came to my senses, I don’t know. When I
looked again, it wasn’t there. Yet I think I caught a glimpse, with
the tail of my eye, as the saying is, of something dark shooting under
the shadow of the bank. I couldn’t see no more eyes, though.
‘I said to myself: ‘‘dreaming again, Sam Gamgee,’’ I said; and I
said no more just then. But I’ve been thinking since, and now I’m
not so sure. What do you make of it, Mr. Frodo?’
‘I should make nothing of it but a log and the dusk and sleep in
your eyes, Sam,’ said Frodo, ‘if this was the ﬁrst time that those eyes
had been seen. But it isn’t. I saw them away back north before we
reached Lo´ rien. And I saw a strange creature with eyes climbing to
the ﬂet that night. Haldir saw it too. And do you remember the report
of the Elves that went after the orc-band?’
‘Ah,’ said Sam, ‘I do; and I remember more too. I don’t like my
thoughts; but thinking of one thing and another, and Mr. Bilbo’s
stories and all, I fancy I could put a name on the creature, at a guess.
A nasty name. Gollum, maybe?’
‘Yes, that is what I have feared for some time,’ said Frodo. ‘Ever
since the night on the ﬂet. I suppose he was lurking in Moria, and
picked up our trail then; but I hoped that our stay in Lo´ rien would
throw him off the scent again. The miserable creature must have
been hiding in the woods by the Silverlode, watching us start off !’
‘That’s about it,’ said Sam. ‘And we’d better be a bit more watchful
ourselves, or we’ll feel some nasty ﬁngers round our necks one of
these nights, if we ever wake up to feel anything. And that’s what I
was leading up to. No need to trouble Strider or the others tonight.
I’ll keep watch. I can sleep tomorrow, being no more than luggage
in a boat, as you might say.’
‘I might,’ said Frodo, ‘and I might say ‘‘luggage with eyes’’. You
shall watch; but only if you promise to wake me half-way towards
morning, if nothing happens before then.’
In the dead hours Frodo came out of a deep dark sleep to ﬁnd
Sam shaking him. ‘It’s a shame to wake you,’ whispered Sam, ‘but
that’s what you said. There’s nothing to tell, or not much. I thought
I heard some soft plashing and a snifﬁng noise, a while back; but
you hear a lot of such queer sounds by a river at night.’
He lay down, and Frodo sat up, huddled in his blankets, and
fought off his sleep. Minutes or hours passed slowly, and nothing
happened. Frodo was just yielding to the temptation to lie down
again when a dark shape, hardly visible, ﬂoated close to one of the

moored boats. A long whitish hand could be dimly seen as it shot
out and grabbed the gunwale; two pale lamplike eyes shone coldly
as they peered inside, and then they lifted and gazed up at Frodo on
the eyot. They were not more than a yard or two away, and Frodo
heard the soft hiss of intaken breath. He stood up, drawing Sting
from its sheath, and faced the eyes. Immediately their light was shut
off. There was another hiss and a splash, and the dark log-shape shot
away downstream into the night. Aragorn stirred in his sleep, turned
over, and sat up.
‘What is it?’ he whispered, springing up and coming to Frodo. ‘I
felt something in my sleep. Why have you drawn your sword?’
‘Gollum,’ answered Frodo. ‘Or at least, so I guess.’
‘Ah!’ said Aragorn. ‘So you know about our little footpad, do you?
He padded after us all through Moria and right down to Nimrodel.
Since we took to boats, he has been lying on a log and paddling with
hands and feet. I have tried to catch him once or twice at night; but
he is slier than a fox, and as slippery as a ﬁsh. I hoped the river-voyage
would beat him, but he is too clever a waterman.
‘We shall have to try going faster tomorrow. You lie down now,
and I will keep watch for what is left of the night. I wish I could lay
my hands on the wretch. We might make him useful. But if I cannot,
we shall have to try and lose him. He is very dangerous. Quite apart
from murder by night on his own account, he may put any enemy
that is about on our track.’
The night passed without Gollum showing so much as a shadow
again. After that the Company kept a sharp look-out, but they saw
no more of Gollum while the voyage lasted. If he was still following,
he was very wary and cunning. At Aragorn’s bidding they paddled
now for long spells, and the banks went swiftly by. But they saw little
of the country, for they journeyed mostly by night and twilight, resting
by day, and lying as hidden as the land allowed. In this way the time
passed without event until the seventh day.
The weather was still grey and overcast, with wind from the East,
but as evening drew into night the sky away westward cleared, and
pools of faint light, yellow and pale green, opened under the grey
shores of cloud. There the white rind of the new Moon could be
seen glimmering in the remote lakes. Sam looked at it and puckered
his brows.
The next day the country on either side began to change rapidly.
The banks began to rise and grow stony. Soon they were passing
through a hilly rocky land, and on both shores there were steep slopes
buried in deep brakes of thorn and sloe, tangled with brambles and
creepers. Behind them stood low crumbling cliffs, and chimneys of

grey weathered stone dark with ivy; and beyond these again there
rose high ridges crowned with wind-writhen ﬁrs. They were drawing
near to the grey hill-country of the Emyn Muil, the southern march
of Wilderland.
There were many birds about the cliffs and the rock-chimneys,
and all day high in the air ﬂocks of birds had been circling, black
against the pale sky. As they lay in their camp that day Aragorn
watched the ﬂights doubtfully, wondering if Gollum had been doing
some mischief and the news of their voyage was now moving in the
wilderness. Later as the sun was setting, and the Company was stir-
ring and getting ready to start again, he descried a dark spot against
the fading light: a great bird high and far off, now wheeling, now
ﬂying on slowly southwards.
‘What is that, Legolas?’ he asked, pointing to the northern sky. ‘Is
it, as I think, an eagle?’
‘Yes,’ said Legolas. ‘It is an eagle, a hunting eagle. I wonder what
that forebodes. It is far from the mountains.’
‘We will not start until it is fully dark,’ said Aragorn.
The eighth night of their journey came. It was silent and windless;
the grey east wind had passed away. The thin crescent of the Moon
had fallen early into the pale sunset, but the sky was clear above, and
though far away in the South there were great ranges of cloud that
still shone faintly, in the West stars glinted bright.
‘Come!’ said Aragorn. ‘We will venture one more journey by night.
We are coming to reaches of the River that I do not know well; for
I have never journeyed by water in these parts before, not between
here and the rapids of Sarn Gebir. But if I am right in my reckoning,
those are still many miles ahead. Still there are dangerous places even
before we come there: rocks and stony eyots in the stream. We must
keep a sharp watch and not try to paddle swiftly.’
To Sam in the leading boat was given the task of watchman. He
lay forward peering into the gloom. The night grew dark, but the
stars above were strangely bright, and there was a glimmer on the
face of the River. It was close on midnight, and they had been drifting
for some while, hardly using the paddles, when suddenly Sam cried
out. Only a few yards ahead dark shapes loomed up in the stream
and he heard the swirl of racing water. There was a swift current
which swung left, towards the eastern shore where the channel was
clear. As they were swept aside the travellers could see, now very
close, the pale foam of the River lashing against sharp rocks that were
thrust out far into the stream like a ridge of teeth. The boats were
all huddled together.
‘Hoy there, Aragorn!’ shouted Boromir, as his boat bumped into

the leader. ‘This is madness! We cannot dare the Rapids by night!
But no boat can live in Sarn Gebir, be it night or day.’
‘Back, back!’ cried Aragorn. ‘Turn! Turn if you can!’ He drove
his paddle into the water, trying to hold the boat and bring it round.
‘I am out of my reckoning,’ he said to Frodo. ‘I did not know that
we had come so far: Anduin ﬂows faster than I thought. Sarn Gebir
must be close at hand already.’
With great efforts they checked the boats and slowly brought them
about; but at ﬁrst they could make only small headway against the
current, and all the time they were carried nearer and nearer to the
eastern bank. Now dark and ominous it loomed up in the night.
‘All together, paddle!’ shouted Boromir. ‘Paddle! Or we shall be
driven on the shoals.’ Even as he spoke Frodo felt the keel beneath
him grate upon stone.
At that moment there was a twang of bowstrings: several arrows
whistled over them, and some fell among them. One smote Frodo
between the shoulders and he lurched forward with a cry, letting go
his paddle: but the arrow fell back, foiled by his hidden coat of mail.
Another passed through Aragorn’s hood; and a third stood fast in
the gunwale of the second boat, close by Merry’s hand. Sam thought
he could glimpse black ﬁgures running to and fro upon the long
shingle-banks that lay under the eastern shore. They seemed very
near.
‘Yrch! ’ said Legolas, falling into his own tongue.
‘Orcs!’ cried Gimli.
‘Gollum’s doing, I’ll be bound,’ said Sam to Frodo. ‘And a nice
place to choose, too. The River seems set on taking us right into
their arms!’
They all leaned forward straining at the paddles: even Sam took a
hand. Every moment they expected to feel the bite of black-feathered
arrows. Many whined overhead or struck the water nearby; but there
were no more hits. It was dark, but not too dark for the night-eyes
of Orcs, and in the star-glimmer they must have offered their cunning
foes some mark, unless it was that the grey cloaks of Lo´ rien and the
grey timber of the elf-wrought boats defeated the malice of the archers
of Mordor.
Stroke by stroke they laboured on. In the darkness it was hard to
be sure that they were indeed moving at all; but slowly the swirl of
the water grew less, and the shadow of the eastern bank faded back
into the night. At last, as far as they could judge, they had reached
the middle of the stream again and had driven their boats back some
distance above the jutting rocks. Then half turning they thrust
them with all their strength towards the western shore. Under the

shadow of bushes leaning out over the water they halted and drew
breath.
Legolas laid down his paddle and took up the bow that he had
brought from Lo´ rien. Then he sprang ashore and climbed a few paces
up the bank. Stringing the bow and ﬁtting an arrow he turned, peering
back over the River into the darkness. Across the water there were
shrill cries, but nothing could be seen.
Frodo looked up at the Elf standing tall above him, as he gazed
into the night, seeking a mark to shoot at. His head was dark, crowned
with sharp white stars that glittered in the black pools of the sky
behind. But now rising and sailing up from the South the great clouds
advanced, sending out dark outriders into the starry ﬁelds. A sudden
dread fell on the Company.
‘Elbereth Gilthoniel! ’ sighed Legolas as he looked up. Even as he
did so, a dark shape, like a cloud and yet not a cloud, for it moved
far more swiftly, came out of the blackness in the South, and sped
towards the Company, blotting out all light as it approached. Soon
it appeared as a great winged creature, blacker than the pits in the
night. Fierce voices rose up to greet it from across the water. Frodo
felt a sudden chill running through him and clutching at his heart;
there was a deadly cold, like the memory of an old wound, in his
shoulder. He crouched down, as if to hide.
Suddenly the great bow of Lo´ rien sang. Shrill went the arrow from
the elven-string. Frodo looked up. Almost above him the winged
shape swerved. There was a harsh croaking scream, as it fell out of
the air, vanishing down into the gloom of the eastern shore. The sky
was clean again. There was a tumult of many voices far away, cursing
and wailing in the darkness, and then silence. Neither shaft nor cry
came again from the east that night.
After a while Aragorn led the boats back upstream. They felt their
way along the water’s edge for some distance, until they found a
small shallow bay. A few low trees grew there close to the water, and
behind them rose a steep rocky bank. Here the Company decided to
stay and await the dawn: it was useless to attempt to move further
by night. They made no camp and lit no ﬁre, but lay huddled in the
boats, moored close together.
‘Praised be the bow of Galadriel, and the hand and eye of Legolas!’
said Gimli, as he munched a wafer of lembas. ‘That was a mighty
shot in the dark, my friend!’
‘But who can say what it hit?’ said Legolas.
‘I cannot,’ said Gimli. ‘But I am glad that the shadow came no
nearer. I liked it not at all. Too much it reminded me of the shadow
in Moria – the shadow of the Balrog,’ he ended in a whisper.

‘It was not a Balrog,’ said Frodo, still shivering with the chill that
had come upon him. ‘It was something colder. I think it was——’
Then he paused and fell silent.
‘What do you think?’ asked Boromir eagerly, leaning from his boat,
as if he was trying to catch a glimpse of Frodo’s face.
‘I think—No, I will not say,’ answered Frodo. ‘Whatever it was,
its fall has dismayed our enemies.’
‘So it seems,’ said Aragorn. ‘Yet where they are, and how many,
and what they will do next, we do not know. This night we must all
be sleepless! Dark hides us now. But what the day will show who
can tell? Have your weapons close to hand!’
Sam sat tapping the hilt of his sword as if he were counting on
his ﬁngers, and looking up at the sky. ‘It’s very strange,’ he mur-
mured. ‘The Moon’s the same in the Shire and in Wilderland, or it
ought to be. But either it’s out of its running, or I’m all wrong in my
reckoning. You’ll remember, Mr. Frodo, the Moon was waning as
we lay on the ﬂet up in that tree: a week from the full, I reckon. And
we’d been a week on the way last night, when up pops a New Moon
as thin as a nail-paring, as if we had never stayed no time in the
Elvish country.
‘Well, I can remember three nights there for certain, and I seem
to remember several more, but I would take my oath it was never a
whole month. Anyone would think that time did not count in there!’
‘And perhaps that was the way of it,’ said Frodo. ‘In that land,
maybe, we were in a time that has elsewhere long gone by. It was
not, I think, until Silverlode bore us back to Anduin that we returned
to the time that ﬂows through mortal lands to the Great Sea. And I
don’t remember any moon, either new or old, in Caras Galadhon:
only stars by night and sun by day.’
Legolas stirred in his boat. ‘Nay, time does not tarry ever,’ he said;
‘but change and growth is not in all things and places alike. For the
Elves the world moves, and it moves both very swift and very slow.
Swift, because they themselves change little, and all else ﬂeets by: it
is a grief to them. Slow, because they need not count the running
years, not for themselves. The passing seasons are but ripples ever
repeated in the long long stream. Yet beneath the Sun all things must
wear to an end at last.’
‘But the wearing is slow in Lo´ rien,’ said Frodo. ‘The power of the
Lady is on it. Rich are the hours, though short they seem, in Caras
Galadhon, where Galadriel wields the Elven-ring.’
‘That should not have been said outside Lo´ rien, not even to me,’
said Aragorn. ‘Speak no more of it! But so it is, Sam: in that land
you lost your count. There time ﬂowed swiftly by us, as for the Elves.

The old moon passed, and a new moon waxed and waned in the
world outside, while we tarried there. And yestereve a new moon
came again. Winter is nearly gone. Time ﬂows on to a spring of little
hope.’
The night passed silently. No voice or call was heard again across
the water. The travellers huddled in their boats felt the changing
of the weather. The air grew warm and very still under the great
moist clouds that had ﬂoated up from the South and the distant seas.
The rushing of the River over the rocks of the rapids seemed to grow
louder and closer. The twigs of the trees above them began to drip.
When the day came the mood of the world about them had become
soft and sad. Slowly the dawn grew to a pale light, diffused and
shadowless. There was mist on the River, and white fog swathed the
shore; the far bank could not be seen.
‘I can’t abide fog,’ said Sam; ‘but this seems to be a lucky one.
Now perhaps we can get away without those cursed goblins seeing
us.’
‘Perhaps so,’ said Aragorn. ‘But it will be hard to ﬁnd the path
unless the fog lifts a little later on. And we must ﬁnd the path, if we
are to pass Sarn Gebir and come to the Emyn Muil.’
‘I do not see why we should pass the Rapids or follow the River
any further,’ said Boromir. ‘If the Emyn Muil lie before us, then we
can abandon these cockle-boats, and strike westward and southward,
until we come to the Entwash and cross into my own land.’
‘We can, if we are making for Minas Tirith,’ said Aragorn, ‘but
that is not yet agreed. And such a course may be more perilous than
it sounds. The vale of Entwash is ﬂat and fenny, and fog is a deadly
peril there for those on foot and laden. I would not abandon our
boats until we must. The River is at least a path that cannot be
missed.’
‘But the Enemy holds the eastern bank,’ objected Boromir. ‘And
even if you pass the Gates of Argonath and come unmolested to the
Tindrock, what will you do then? Leap down the Falls and land in
the marshes?’
‘No!’ answered Aragorn. ‘Say rather that we will bear our boats
by the ancient way to Rauros-foot, and there take to the water again.
Do you not know, Boromir, or do you choose to forget the North
Stair, and the high seat upon Amon Hen, that were made in the days
of the great kings? I at least have a mind to stand in that high place
again, before I decide my further course. There, maybe, we shall see
some sign that will guide us.’
Boromir held out long against this choice; but when it became
plain that Frodo would follow Aragorn, wherever he went, he gave

in. ‘It is not the way of the Men of Minas Tirith to desert their friends
at need,’ he said, ‘and you will need my strength, if ever you are to
reach the Tindrock. To the tall isle I will go, but no further. There
I shall turn to my home, alone if my help has not earned the reward
of any companionship.’
The day was now growing, and the fog had lifted a little. It was
decided that Aragorn and Legolas should at once go forward along
the shore, while the others remained by the boats. Aragorn hoped to
ﬁnd some way by which they could carry both their boats and their
baggage to the smoother water beyond the Rapids.
‘Boats of the Elves would not sink, maybe,’ he said, ‘but that does
not say that we should come through Sarn Gebir alive. None have
ever done so yet. No road was made by the Men of Gondor in this
region, for even in their great days their realm did not reach up
Anduin beyond the Emyn Muil; but there is a portage-way some-
where on the western shore, if I can ﬁnd it. It cannot yet have
perished; for light boats used to journey out of Wilderland down to
Osgiliath, and still did so until a few years ago, when the Orcs of
Mordor began to multiply.’
‘Seldom in my life has any boat come out of the North, and the
Orcs prowl on the east-shore,’ said Boromir. ‘If you go forward, peril
will grow with every mile, even if you ﬁnd a path.’
‘Peril lies ahead on every southward road,’ answered Aragorn.
‘Wait for us one day. If we do not return in that time, you will know
that evil has indeed befallen us. Then you must take a new leader
and follow him as best you can.’
It was with a heavy heart that Frodo saw Aragorn and Legolas
climb the steep bank and vanish into the mists; but his fears proved
groundless. Only two or three hours had passed, and it was barely
mid-day, when the shadowy shapes of the explorers appeared again.
‘All is well,’ said Aragorn, as he clambered down the bank. ‘There
is a track, and it leads to a good landing that is still serviceable. The
distance is not great: the head of the Rapids is but half a mile below
us, and they are little more than a mile long. Not far beyond them
the stream becomes clear and smooth again, though it runs swiftly.
Our hardest task will be to get our boats and baggage to the old
portage-way. We have found it, but it lies well back from the water-
side here, and runs under the lee of a rock-wall, a furlong or more
from the shore. We did not ﬁnd where the northward landing lies.
If it still remains, we must have passed it yesterday night. We might
labour far upstream and yet miss it in the fog. I fear we must leave
the River now, and make for the portage-way as best we can from
here.’

‘That would not be easy, even if we were all Men,’ said Boromir.
‘Yet such as we are we will try it,’ said Aragorn.
‘Aye, we will,’ said Gimli. ‘The legs of Men will lag on a rough
road, while a Dwarf goes on, be the burden twice his own weight,
Master Boromir!’
The task proved hard indeed, yet in the end it was done. The
goods were taken out of the boats and brought to the top of the bank,
where there was a level space. Then the boats were drawn out of the
water and carried up. They were far less heavy than any had expected.
Of what tree growing in the Elvish country they were made not even
Legolas knew; but the wood was tough and yet strangely light. Merry
and Pippin alone could carry their boat with ease along the ﬂat.
Nonetheless it needed the strength of the two Men to lift and haul
them over the ground that the Company now had to cross. It sloped
up away from the River, a tumbled waste of grey limestone-boulders,
with many hidden holes shrouded with weeds and bushes; there were
thickets of brambles, and sheer dells; and here and there boggy pools
fed by waters trickling from the terraces further inland.
One by one Boromir and Aragorn carried the boats, while the
others toiled and scrambled after them with the baggage. At last all
was removed and laid on the portage-way. Then with little further
hindrance, save from sprawling briars and many fallen stones, they
moved forward all together. Fog still hung in veils upon the crumbling
rock-wall, and to their left mist shrouded the River: they could hear
it rushing and foaming over the sharp shelves and stony teeth of Sarn
Gebir, but they could not see it. Twice they made the journey, before
all was brought safe to the southern landing.
There the portage-way, turning back to the water-side, ran gently
down to the shallow edge of a little pool. It seemed to have been
scooped in the river-side, not by hand, but by the water swirling
down from Sarn Gebir against a low pier of rock that jutted out some
way into the stream. Beyond it the shore rose sheer into a grey cliff,
and there was no further passage for those on foot.
Already the short afternoon was past, and a dim cloudy dusk was
closing in. They sat beside the water listening to the confused rush
and roar of the Rapids hidden in the mist; they were tired and sleepy,
and their hearts were as gloomy as the dying day.
‘Well, here we are, and here we must pass another night,’ said
Boromir. ‘We need sleep, and even if Aragorn had a mind to pass
the Gates of Argonath by night, we are all too tired – except, no
doubt, our sturdy dwarf.’
Gimli made no reply: he was nodding as he sat.
‘Let us rest as much as we can now,’ said Aragorn. ‘Tomorrow

we must journey by day again. Unless the weather changes once more
and cheats us, we shall have a good chance of slipping through,
unseen by any eyes on the eastern shore. But tonight two must watch
together in turns: three hours off and one on guard.’
Nothing happened that night worse than a brief drizzle of rain an
hour before dawn. As soon as it was fully light they started. Already
the fog was thinning. They kept as close as they could to the western
side, and they could see the dim shapes of the low cliffs rising ever
higher, shadowy walls with their feet in the hurrying river. In the
mid-morning the clouds drew down lower, and it began to rain
heavily. They drew the skin-covers over their boats to prevent them
from being ﬂooded, and drifted on; little could be seen before them
or about them through the grey falling curtains.
The rain, however, did not last long. Slowly the sky above grew
lighter, and then suddenly the clouds broke, and their draggled fringes
trailed away northward up the River. The fogs and mists were gone.
Before the travellers lay a wide ravine, with great rocky sides to which
clung, upon shelves and in narrow crevices, a few thrawn trees. The
channel grew narrower and the River swifter. Now they were speeding
along with little hope of stopping or turning, whatever they might
meet ahead. Over them was a lane of pale-blue sky, around them the
dark overshadowed River, and before them black, shutting out the
sun, the hills of Emyn Muil, in which no opening could be seen.
Frodo peering forward saw in the distance two great rocks
approaching: like great pinnacles or pillars of stone they seemed. Tall
and sheer and ominous they stood upon either side of the stream. A
narrow gap appeared between them, and the River swept the boats
towards it.
‘Behold the Argonath, the Pillars of the Kings!’ cried Aragorn.
‘We shall pass them soon. Keep the boats in line, and as far apart as
you can! Hold the middle of the stream!’
As Frodo was borne towards them the great pillars rose like towers
to meet him. Giants they seemed to him, vast grey ﬁgures silent but
threatening. Then he saw that they were indeed shaped and
fashioned: the craft and power of old had wrought upon them, and
still they preserved through the suns and rains of forgotten years the
mighty likenesses in which they had been hewn. Upon great pedestals
founded in the deep waters stood two great kings of stone: still with
blurred eyes and crannied brows they frowned upon the North. The
left hand of each was raised palm outwards in gesture of warning; in
each right hand there was an axe; upon each head there was a crumb-
ling helm and crown. Great power and majesty they still wore, the
silent wardens of a long-vanished kingdom. Awe and fear fell upon

Frodo, and he cowered down, shutting his eyes and not daring to
look up as the boat drew near. Even Boromir bowed his head as the
boats whirled by, frail and ﬂeeting as little leaves, under the enduring
shadow of the sentinels of Nu´menor. So they passed into the dark
chasm of the Gates.
Sheer rose the dreadful cliffs to unguessed heights on either side.
Far off was the dim sky. The black waters roared and echoed, and
a wind screamed over them. Frodo crouching over his knees heard
Sam in front muttering and groaning: ‘What a place! What a horrible
place! Just let me get out of this boat, and I’ll never wet my toes in
a puddle again, let alone a river!’
‘Fear not!’ said a strange voice behind him. Frodo turned and saw
Strider, and yet not Strider; for the weatherworn Ranger was no
longer there. In the stern sat Aragorn son of Arathorn, proud and
erect, guiding the boat with skilful strokes; his hood was cast back,
and his dark hair was blowing in the wind, a light was in his eyes: a
king returning from exile to his own land.
‘Fear not!’ he said. ‘Long have I desired to look upon the likenesses
of Isildur and Ana´rion, my sires of old. Under their shadow Elessar,
the Elfstone son of Arathorn of the House of Valandil Isildur’s son,
heir of Elendil, has naught to dread!’
Then the light of his eyes faded, and he spoke to himself: ‘Would
that Gandalf were here! How my heart yearns for Minas Anor and
the walls of my own city! But whither now shall I go?’
The chasm was long and dark, and ﬁlled with the noise of wind
and rushing water and echoing stone. It bent somewhat towards the
west so that at ﬁrst all was dark ahead; but soon Frodo saw a tall
gap of light before him, ever growing. Swiftly it drew near, and sud-
denly the boats shot through, out into a wide clear light.
The sun, already long fallen from the noon, was shining in a windy
sky. The pent waters spread out into a long oval lake, pale Nen
Hithoel, fenced by steep grey hills whose sides were clad with trees,
but their heads were bare, cold-gleaming in the sunlight. At the far
southern end rose three peaks. The midmost stood somewhat forward
from the others and sundered from them, an island in the waters,
about which the ﬂowing River ﬂung pale shimmering arms. Distant
but deep there came up on the wind a roaring sound like the roll of
thunder heard far away.
‘Behold Tol Brandir!’ said Aragorn, pointing south to the tall peak.
‘Upon the left stands Amon Lhaw, and upon the right is Amon Hen,
the Hills of Hearing and of Sight. In the days of the great kings there
were high seats upon them, and watch was kept there. But it is said
that no foot of man or beast has ever been set upon Tol Brandir.

Ere the shade of night falls we shall come to them. I hear the endless
voice of Rauros calling.’
The Company rested now for a while, drifting south on the current
that ﬂowed through the middle of the lake. They ate some food, and
then they took to their paddles and hastened on their way. The sides
of the westward hills fell into shadow, and the Sun grew round and
red. Here and there a misty star peered out. The three peaks loomed
before them, darkling in the twilight. Rauros was roaring with a great
voice. Already night was laid on the ﬂowing waters when the travellers
came at last under the shadow of the hills.
The tenth day of their journey was over. Wilderland was behind
them. They could go no further without choice between the east-way
and the west. The last stage of the Quest was before them.

Chapter 10
T H E  B R E A K I N G  O F
T H E  F E L L O W S H I P
Aragorn led them to the right arm of the River. Here upon its western
side under the shadow of Tol Brandir a green lawn ran down to the
water from the feet of Amon Hen. Behind it rose the ﬁrst gentle
slopes of the hill clad with trees, and trees marched away westward
along the curving shores of the lake. A little spring fell tumbling down
and fed the grass.
‘Here we will rest tonight,’ said Aragorn. ‘This is the lawn of Parth
Galen: a fair place in the summer days of old. Let us hope that no
evil has yet come here.’
They drew up their boats on the green banks, and beside them
they made their camp. They set a watch, but had no sight nor sound
of their enemies. If Gollum had contrived to follow them, he remained
unseen and unheard. Nonetheless as the night wore on Aragorn grew
uneasy, tossing often in his sleep and waking. In the small hours he
got up and came to Frodo, whose turn it was to watch.
‘Why are you waking?’ asked Frodo. ‘It is not your watch.’
‘I do not know,’ answered Aragorn; ‘but a shadow and a threat
has been growing in my sleep. It would be well to draw your sword.’
‘Why?’ said Frodo. ‘Are enemies at hand?’
‘Let us see what Sting may show,’ answered Aragorn.
Frodo then drew the elf-blade from its sheath. To his dismay the
edges gleamed dimly in the night. ‘Orcs!’ he said. ‘Not very near,
and yet too near, it seems.’
‘I feared as much,’ said Aragorn. ‘But maybe they are not on this
side of the River. The light of Sting is faint, and it may point to no
more than spies of Mordor roaming on the slopes of Amon Lhaw. I
have never heard before of Orcs upon Amon Hen. Yet who knows
what may happen in these evil days, now that Minas Tirith no longer
holds secure the passages of Anduin. We must go warily tomorrow.’
The day came like ﬁre and smoke. Low in the East there were
black bars of cloud like the fumes of a great burning. The rising sun
lit them from beneath with ﬂames of murky red; but soon it climbed
above them into a clear sky. The summit of Tol Brandir was tipped
with gold. Frodo looked out eastward and gazed at the tall island.
Its sides sprang sheer out of the running water. High up above the

tall cliffs were steep slopes upon which trees climbed, mounting one
head above another; and above them again were grey faces of
inaccessible rock, crowned by a great spire of stone. Many birds were
circling about it, but no sign of other living things could be seen.
When they had eaten, Aragorn called the Company together. ‘The
day has come at last,’ he said: ‘the day of choice which we have long
delayed. What shall now become of our Company that has travelled
so far in fellowship? Shall we turn west with Boromir and go to the
wars of Gondor; or turn east to the Fear and Shadow; or shall we
break our fellowship and go this way and that as each may choose?
Whatever we do must be done soon. We cannot long halt here. The
enemy is on the eastern shore, we know; but I fear that the Orcs may
already be on this side of the water.’
There was a long silence in which no one spoke or moved.
‘Well, Frodo,’ said Aragorn at last. ‘I fear that the burden is laid
upon you. You are the Bearer appointed by the Council. Your own
way you alone can choose. In this matter I cannot advise you. I am
not Gandalf, and though I have tried to bear his part, I do not know
what design or hope he had for this hour, if indeed he had any. Most
likely it seems that if he were here now the choice would still wait
on you. Such is your fate.’
Frodo did not answer at once. Then he spoke slowly. ‘I know that
haste is needed, yet I cannot choose. The burden is heavy. Give me
an hour longer, and I will speak. Let me be alone!’
Aragorn looked at him with kindly pity. ‘Very well, Frodo son of
Drogo,’ he said. ‘You shall have an hour, and you shall be alone. We
will stay here for a while. But do not stray far or out of call.’
Frodo sat for a moment with his head bowed. Sam, who had been
watching his master with great concern, shook his head and muttered:
‘Plain as a pikestaff it is, but it’s no good Sam Gamgee putting in
his spoke just now.’
Presently Frodo got up and walked away; and Sam saw that while
the others restrained themselves and did not stare at him, the eyes
of Boromir followed Frodo intently, until he passed out of sight in
the trees at the foot of Amon Hen.
Wandering aimlessly at ﬁrst in the wood, Frodo found that his
feet were leading him up towards the slopes of the hill. He came to
a path, the dwindling ruins of a road of long ago. In steep places
stairs of stone had been hewn, but now they were cracked and worn,
and split by the roots of trees. For some while he climbed, not caring
which way he went, until he came to a grassy place. Rowan-trees
grew about it, and in the midst was a wide ﬂat stone. The little upland
lawn was open upon the East and was ﬁlled now with the early

sunlight. Frodo halted and looked out over the River, far below him,
to Tol Brandir and the birds wheeling in the great gulf of air between
him and the untrodden isle. The voice of Rauros was a mighty roaring
mingled with a deep throbbing boom.
He sat down upon the stone and cupped his chin in his hands,
staring eastwards but seeing little with his eyes. All that had happened
since Bilbo left the Shire was passing through his mind, and he re-
called and pondered everything that he could remember of Gandalf ’s
words. Time went on, and still he was no nearer to a choice.
Suddenly he awoke from his thoughts: a strange feeling came to
him that something was behind him, that unfriendly eyes were upon
him. He sprang up and turned; but all that he saw to his surprise
was Boromir, and his face was smiling and kind.
‘I was afraid for you, Frodo,’ he said, coming forward. ‘If Aragorn
is right and Orcs are near, then none of us should wander alone, and
you least of all: so much depends on you. And my heart too is heavy.
May I stay now and talk for a while, since I have found you? It would
comfort me. Where there are so many, all speech becomes a debate
without end. But two together may perhaps ﬁnd wisdom.’
‘You are kind,’ answered Frodo. ‘But I do not think that any
speech will help me. For I know what I should do, but I am afraid
of doing it, Boromir: afraid.’
Boromir stood silent. Rauros roared endlessly on. The wind mur-
mured in the branches of the trees. Frodo shivered.
Suddenly Boromir came and sat beside him. ‘Are you sure that
you do not suffer needlessly?’ he said. ‘I wish to help you. You need
counsel in your hard choice. Will you not take mine?’
‘I think I know already what counsel you would give, Boromir,’
said Frodo. ‘And it would seem like wisdom but for the warning of
my heart.’
‘Warning? Warning against what?’ said Boromir sharply.
‘Against delay. Against the way that seems easier. Against refusal
of the burden that is laid on me. Against – well, if it must be said,
against trust in the strength and truth of Men.’
‘Yet that strength has long protected you far away in your little
country, though you knew it not.’
‘I do not doubt the valour of your people. But the world is chang-
ing. The walls of Minas Tirith may be strong, but they are not strong
enough. If they fail, what then?’
‘We shall fall in battle valiantly. Yet there is still hope that they
will not fail.’
‘No hope while the Ring lasts,’ said Frodo.
‘Ah! The Ring!’ said Boromir, his eyes lighting. ‘The Ring! Is it
not a strange fate that we should suffer so much fear and doubt for

so small a thing? So small a thing! And I have seen it only for an
instant in the house of Elrond. Could I not have a sight of it again?’
Frodo looked up. His heart went suddenly cold. He caught the
strange gleam in Boromir’s eyes, yet his face was still kind and
friendly. ‘It is best that it should lie hidden,’ he answered.
‘As you wish. I care not,’ said Boromir. ‘Yet may I not even speak
of it? For you seem ever to think only of its power in the hands of
the Enemy: of its evil uses not of its good. The world is changing,
you say. Minas Tirith will fall, if the Ring lasts. But why? Certainly,
if the Ring were with the Enemy. But why, if it were with us?’
‘Were you not at the Council?’ answered Frodo. ‘Because we
cannot use it, and what is done with it turns to evil.’
Boromir got up and walked about impatiently. ‘So you go on,’ he
cried. ‘Gandalf, Elrond – all these folk have taught you to say so.
For themselves they may be right. These elves and half-elves and
wizards, they would come to grief perhaps. Yet often I doubt if they
are wise and not merely timid. But each to his own kind. True-hearted
Men, they will not be corrupted. We of Minas Tirith have been
staunch through long years of trial. We do not desire the power of
wizard-lords, only strength to defend ourselves, strength in a just
cause. And behold! in our need chance brings to light the Ring of
Power. It is a gift, I say; a gift to the foes of Mordor. It is mad not
to use it, to use the power of the Enemy against him. The fearless,
the ruthless, these alone will achieve victory. What could not a warrior
do in this hour, a great leader? What could not Aragorn do? Or if
he refuses, why not Boromir? The Ring would give me power of
Command. How I would drive the hosts of Mordor, and all men
would ﬂock to my banner!’
Boromir strode up and down, speaking ever more loudly. Almost
he seemed to have forgotten Frodo, while his talk dwelt on walls and
weapons, and the mustering of men; and he drew plans for great
alliances and glorious victories to be; and he cast down Mordor, and
became himself a mighty king, benevolent and wise. Suddenly he
stopped and waved his arms.
‘And they tell us to throw it away!’ he cried. ‘I do not say destroy
it. That might be well, if reason could show any hope of doing so.
It does not. The only plan that is proposed to us is that a halﬂing
should walk blindly into Mordor and offer the Enemy every chance
of recapturing it for himself. Folly!
‘Surely you see it, my friend?’ he said, turning now suddenly to
Frodo again. ‘You say that you are afraid. If it is so, the boldest
should pardon you. But is it not really your good sense that revolts?’
‘No, I am afraid,’ said Frodo. ‘Simply afraid. But I am glad to
have heard you speak so fully. My mind is clearer now.’

‘Then you will come to Minas Tirith?’ cried Boromir. His eyes
were shining and his face eager.
‘You misunderstand me,’ said Frodo.
‘But you will come, at least for a while?’ Boromir persisted. ‘My
city is not far now; and it is little further from there to Mordor than
from here. We have been long in the wilderness, and you need news
of what the Enemy is doing before you make a move. Come with
me, Frodo,’ he said. ‘You need rest before your venture, if go you
must.’ He laid his hand on the hobbit’s shoulder in friendly fashion;
but Frodo felt the hand trembling with suppressed excitement. He
stepped quickly away, and eyed with alarm the tall Man, nearly twice
his height and many times his match in strength.
‘Why are you so unfriendly?’ said Boromir. ‘I am a true man,
neither thief nor tracker. I need your Ring: that you know now; but
I give you my word that I do not desire to keep it. Will you not at
least let me make trial of my plan? Lend me the Ring!’
‘No! no!’ cried Frodo. ‘The Council laid it upon me to bear it.’
‘It is by our own folly that the Enemy will defeat us,’ cried Boromir.
‘How it angers me! Fool! Obstinate fool! Running wilfully to death
and ruining our cause. If any mortals have claim to the Ring, it is
the men of Nu´menor, and not Halﬂings. It is not yours save by
unhappy chance. It might have been mine. It should be mine. Give
it to me!’
Frodo did not answer, but moved away till the great ﬂat stone
stood between them. ‘Come, come, my friend!’ said Boromir in a
softer voice. ‘Why not get rid of it? Why not be free of your doubt
and fear? You can lay the blame on me, if you will. You can say that
I was too strong and took it by force. For I am too strong for you,
halﬂing,’ he cried; and suddenly he sprang over the stone and leaped
at Frodo. His fair and pleasant face was hideously changed; a raging
ﬁre was in his eyes.
Frodo dodged aside and again put the stone between them. There
was only one thing he could do: trembling he pulled out the Ring
upon its chain and quickly slipped it on his ﬁnger, even as Boromir
sprang at him again. The Man gasped, stared for a moment amazed,
and then ran wildly about, seeking here and there among the rocks
and trees.
‘Miserable trickster!’ he shouted. ‘Let me get my hands on you!
Now I see your mind. You will take the Ring to Sauron and sell us
all. You have only waited your chance to leave us in the lurch. Curse
you and all halﬂings to death and darkness!’ Then, catching his foot
on a stone, he fell sprawling and lay upon his face. For a while he
was as still as if his own curse had struck him down; then suddenly
he wept.

He rose and passed his hand over his eyes, dashing away the tears.
‘What have I said?’ he cried. ‘What have I done? Frodo, Frodo!’ he
called. ‘Come back! A madness took me, but it has passed. Come
back!’
There was no answer. Frodo did not even hear his cries. He was
already far away, leaping blindly up the path to the hill-top. Terror
and grief shook him, seeing in his thought the mad ﬁerce face of
Boromir, and his burning eyes.
Soon he came out alone on the summit of Amon Hen, and halted,
gasping for breath. He saw as through a mist a wide ﬂat circle, paved
with mighty ﬂags, and surrounded with a crumbling battlement; and
in the middle, set upon four carven pillars, was a high seat, reached
by a stair of many steps. Up he went and sat upon the ancient
chair, feeling like a lost child that had clambered upon the throne of
mountain-kings.
At ﬁrst he could see little. He seemed to be in a world of mist in
which there were only shadows: the Ring was upon him. Then here
and there the mist gave way and he saw many visions: small and
clear as if they were under his eyes upon a table, and yet remote.
There was no sound, only bright living images. The world seemed
to have shrunk and fallen silent. He was sitting upon the Seat of
Seeing, on Amon Hen, the Hill of the Eye of the Men of Nu´menor.
Eastward he looked into wide uncharted lands, nameless plains, and
forests unexplored. Northward he looked, and the Great River lay
like a ribbon beneath him, and the Misty Mountains stood small and
hard as broken teeth. Westward he looked and saw the broad pastures
of Rohan; and Orthanc, the pinnacle of Isengard, like a black spike.
Southward he looked, and below his very feet the Great River curled
like a toppling wave and plunged over the falls of Rauros into a
foaming pit; a glimmering rainbow played upon the fume. And Ethir
Anduin he saw, the mighty delta of the River, and myriads of sea-birds
whirling like a white dust in the sun, and beneath them a green and
silver sea, rippling in endless lines.
But everywhere he looked he saw the signs of war. The Misty
Mountains were crawling like anthills: orcs were issuing out of a
thousand holes. Under the boughs of Mirkwood there was deadly
strife of Elves and Men and fell beasts. The land of the Beornings
was aﬂame; a cloud was over Moria; smoke rose on the borders of
Lo´rien.
Horsemen were galloping on the grass of Rohan; wolves poured
from Isengard. From the havens of Harad ships of war put out to
sea; and out of the East Men were moving endlessly: swordsmen,
spearmen, bowmen upon horses, chariots of chieftains and laden

wains. All the power of the Dark Lord was in motion. Then turning
south again he beheld Minas Tirith. Far away it seemed, and beauti-
ful: white-walled, many-towered, proud and fair upon its mountain-
seat; its battlements glittered with steel, and its turrets were bright
with many banners. Hope leaped in his heart. But against Minas
Tirith was set another fortress, greater and more strong. Thither,
eastward, unwilling his eye was drawn. It passed the ruined bridges
of Osgiliath, the grinning gates of Minas Morgul, and the haunted
Mountains, and it looked upon Gorgoroth, the valley of terror in the
Land of Mordor. Darkness lay there under the Sun. Fire glowed
amid the smoke. Mount Doom was burning, and a great reek rising.
Then at last his gaze was held: wall upon wall, battlement upon
battlement, black, immeasurably strong, mountain of iron, gate of
steel, tower of adamant, he saw it: Barad-duˆr, Fortress of Sauron.
All hope left him.
And suddenly he felt the Eye. There was an eye in the Dark Tower
that did not sleep. He knew that it had become aware of his gaze. A
ﬁerce eager will was there. It leaped towards him; almost like a ﬁnger
he felt it, searching for him. Very soon it would nail him down, know
just exactly where he was. Amon Lhaw it touched. It glanced upon
Tol Brandir – he threw himself from the seat, crouching, covering
his head with his grey hood.
He heard himself crying out: Never, never! Or was it: Verily I come,
I come to you? He could not tell. Then as a ﬂash from some other
point of power there came to his mind another thought: Take it off !
Take it off ! Fool, take it off ! Take off the Ring!
The two powers strove in him. For a moment, perfectly balanced
between their piercing points, he writhed, tormented. Suddenly he
was aware of himself again, Frodo, neither the Voice nor the Eye:
free to choose, and with one remaining instant in which to do so.
He took the Ring off his ﬁnger. He was kneeling in clear sunlight
before the high seat. A black shadow seemed to pass like an arm
above him; it missed Amon Hen and groped out west, and faded.
Then all the sky was clean and blue and birds sang in every tree.
Frodo rose to his feet. A great weariness was on him, but his will
was ﬁrm and his heart lighter. He spoke aloud to himself. ‘I will do
now what I must,’ he said. ‘This at least is plain: the evil of the Ring
is already at work even in the Company, and the Ring must leave
them before it does more harm. I will go alone. Some I cannot trust,
and those I can trust are too dear to me: poor old Sam, and Merry
and Pippin. Strider, too: his heart yearns for Minas Tirith, and he
will be needed there, now Boromir has fallen into evil. I will go alone.
At once.’
He went quickly down the path and came back to the lawn where

Boromir had found him. Then he halted, listening. He thought he
could hear cries and calls from the woods near the shore below.
‘They’ll be hunting for me,’ he said. ‘I wonder how long I have
been away. Hours, I should think.’ He hesitated. ‘What can I do?’
he muttered. ‘I must go now or I shall never go. I shan’t get a chance
again. I hate leaving them, and like this without any explanation. But
surely they will understand. Sam will. And what else can I do?’
Slowly he drew out the Ring and put it on once more. He vanished
and passed down the hill, less than a rustle of the wind.
The others remained long by the river-side. For some time they
had been silent, moving restlessly about; but now they were sitting
in a circle, and they were talking. Every now and again they made
efforts to speak of other things, of their long road and many adven-
tures; they questioned Aragorn concerning the realm of Gondor and
its ancient history, and the remnants of its great works that could
still be seen in this strange border-land of the Emyn Muil: the stone
kings and the seats of Lhaw and Hen, and the great Stair beside the
falls of Rauros. But always their thoughts and words strayed back to
Frodo and the Ring. What would Frodo choose to do? Why was he
hesitating?
‘He is debating which course is the most desperate, I think,’ said
Aragorn. ‘And well he may. It is now more hopeless than ever for
the Company to go east, since we have been tracked by Gollum, and
must fear that the secret of our journey is already betrayed. But Minas
Tirith is no nearer to the Fire and the destruction of the Burden.
‘We may remain there for a while and make a brave stand; but
the Lord Denethor and all his men cannot hope to do what even
Elrond said was beyond his power: either to keep the Burden secret,
or to hold off the full might of the Enemy when he comes to take it.
Which way would any of us choose in Frodo’s place? I do not know.
Now indeed we miss Gandalf most.’
‘Grievous is our loss,’ said Legolas. ‘Yet we must needs make up
our minds without his aid. Why cannot we decide, and so help Frodo?
Let us call him back and then vote! I should vote for Minas Tirith.’
‘And so should I,’ said Gimli. ‘We, of course, were only sent to
help the Bearer along the road, to go no further than we wished; and
none of us is under any oath or command to seek Mount Doom.
Hard was my parting from Lothlo´ rien. Yet I have come so far, and
I say this: now we have reached the last choice, it is clear to me that
I cannot leave Frodo. I would choose Minas Tirith, but if he does
not, then I follow him.’
‘And I too will go with him,’ said Legolas. ‘It would be faithless
now to say farewell.’

‘It would indeed be a betrayal, if we all left him,’ said Aragorn.
‘But if he goes east, then all need not go with him; nor do I think
that all should. That venture is desperate: as much so for eight as
for three or two, or one alone. If you would let me choose, then I
should appoint three companions: Sam, who could not bear it other-
wise; and Gimli; and myself. Boromir will return to his own city,
where his father and his people need him; and with him the others
should go, or at least Meriadoc and Peregrin, if Legolas is not willing
to leave us.’
‘That won’t do at all!’ cried Merry. ‘We can’t leave Frodo! Pippin
and I always intended to go wherever he went, and we still do. But
we did not realize what that would mean. It seemed different so far
away, in the Shire or in Rivendell. It would be mad and cruel to let
Frodo go to Mordor. Why can’t we stop him?’
‘We must stop him,’ said Pippin. ‘And that is what he is worrying
about, I am sure. He knows we shan’t agree to his going east. And
he doesn’t like to ask anyone to go with him, poor old fellow. Imagine
it: going off to Mordor alone!’ Pippin shuddered. ‘But the dear silly
old hobbit, he ought to know that he hasn’t got to ask. He ought to
know that if we can’t stop him, we shan’t leave him.’
‘Begging your pardon,’ said Sam. ‘I don’t think you understand
my master at all. He isn’t hesitating about which way to go. Of course
not! What’s the good of Minas Tirith anyway? To him, I mean,
begging your pardon, Master Boromir,’ he added, and turned. It was
then that they discovered that Boromir, who at ﬁrst had been sitting
silent on the outside of the circle, was no longer there.
‘Now where’s he got to?’ cried Sam, looking worried. ‘He’s been
a bit queer lately, to my mind. But anyway he’s not in this business.
He’s off to his home, as he always said; and no blame to him. But
Mr. Frodo, he knows he’s got to ﬁnd the Cracks of Doom, if he can.
But he’s afraid. Now it’s come to the point, he’s just plain terriﬁed.
That’s what his trouble is. Of course he’s had a bit of schooling, so
to speak – we all have – since we left home, or he’d be so terriﬁed
he’d just ﬂing the Ring in the River and bolt. But he’s still too
frightened to start. And he isn’t worrying about us either: whether
we’ll go along with him or no. He knows we mean to. That’s another
thing that’s bothering him. If he screws himself up to go, he’ll want
to go alone. Mark my words! We’re going to have trouble when he
comes back. For he’ll screw himself up all right, as sure as his name’s
Baggins.’
‘I believe you speak more wisely than any of us, Sam,’ said
Aragorn. ‘And what shall we do, if you prove right?’
‘Stop him! Don’t let him go!’ cried Pippin.
‘I wonder?’ said Aragorn. ‘He is the Bearer, and the fate of the

Burden is on him. I do not think that it is our part to drive him one
way or the other. Nor do I think that we should succeed, if we tried.
There are other powers at work far stronger.’
‘Well, I wish Frodo would ‘‘screw himself up’’ and come back,
and let us get it over,’ said Pippin. ‘This waiting is horrible! Surely
the time is up?’
‘Yes,’ said Aragorn. ‘The hour is long passed. The morning is
wearing away. We must call for him.’
At that moment Boromir reappeared. He came out from the trees
and walked towards them without speaking. His face looked grim
and sad. He paused as if counting those that were present, and then
sat down aloof, with his eyes on the ground.
‘Where have you been, Boromir?’ asked Aragorn. ‘Have you seen
Frodo?’
Boromir hesitated for a second. ‘Yes, and no,’ he answered slowly.
‘Yes: I found him some way up the hill, and I spoke to him. I urged
him to come to Minas Tirith and not to go east. I grew angry and
he left me. He vanished. I have never seen such a thing happen
before, though I have heard of it in tales. He must have put the Ring
on. I could not ﬁnd him again. I thought he would return to you.’
‘Is that all that you have to say?’ said Aragorn, looking hard and
not too kindly at Boromir.
‘Yes,’ he answered. ‘I will say no more yet.’
‘This is bad!’ cried Sam, jumping up. ‘I don’t know what this Man
has been up to. Why should Mr. Frodo put the thing on? He didn’t
ought to have; and if he has, goodness knows what may have happened!’
‘But he wouldn’t keep it on,’ said Merry. ‘Not when he had
escaped the unwelcome visitor, like Bilbo used to.’
‘But where did he go? Where is he?’ cried Pippin. ‘He’s been away
ages now.’
‘How long is it since you saw Frodo last, Boromir?’ asked Aragorn.
‘Half an hour, maybe,’ he answered. ‘Or it might be an hour. I
have wandered for some time since. I do not know! I do not know!’
He put his head in his hands, and sat as if bowed with grief.
‘An hour since he vanished!’ shouted Sam. ‘We must try and ﬁnd
him at once. Come on!’
‘Wait a moment!’ cried Aragorn. ‘We must divide up into pairs,
and arrange – here, hold on! Wait!’
It was no good. They took no notice of him. Sam had dashed off
ﬁrst. Merry and Pippin had followed, and were already disappearing
westward into the trees by the shore, shouting: Frodo! Frodo! in their
clear, high, hobbit-voices. Legolas and Gimli were running. A sudden
panic or madness seemed to have fallen on the Company.

‘We shall all be scattered and lost,’ groaned Aragorn. ‘Boromir! I
do not know what part you have played in this mischief, but help
now! Go after those two young hobbits, and guard them at the least,
even if you cannot ﬁnd Frodo. Come back to this spot, if you ﬁnd
him, or any traces of him. I shall return soon.’
Aragorn sprang swiftly away and went in pursuit of Sam. Just as
he reached the little lawn among the rowans he overtook him, toiling
uphill, panting and calling, Frodo!
‘Come with me, Sam!’ he said. ‘None of us should be alone. There
is mischief about. I feel it. I am going to the top, to the Seat of Amon
Hen, to see what may be seen. And look! It is as my heart guessed,
Frodo went this way. Follow me, and keep your eyes open!’ He sped
up the path.
Sam did his best, but he could not keep up with Strider the Ranger,
and soon fell behind. He had not gone far before Aragorn was out
of sight ahead. Sam stopped and puffed. Suddenly he clapped his
hand to his head.
‘Whoa, Sam Gamgee!’ he said aloud. ‘Your legs are too short, so
use your head! Let me see now! Boromir isn’t lying, that’s not his
way; but he hasn’t told us everything. Something scared Mr. Frodo
badly. He screwed himself up to the point, sudden. He made up his
mind at last – to go. Where to? Off East. Not without Sam? Yes,
without even his Sam. That’s hard, cruel hard.’
Sam passed his hand over his eyes, brushing away the tears.
‘Steady, Gamgee!’ he said. ‘Think, if you can! He can’t ﬂy across
rivers, and he can’t jump waterfalls. He’s got no gear. So he’s got to
get back to the boats. Back to the boats! Back to the boats, Sam, like
lightning!’
Sam turned and bolted back down the path. He fell and cut his
knees. Up he got and ran on. He came to the edge of the lawn of
Parth Galen by the shore, where the boats were drawn up out of the
water. No one was there. There seemed to be cries in the woods
behind, but he did not heed them. He stood gazing for a moment,
stock-still, gaping. A boat was sliding down the bank all by itself.
With a shout Sam raced across the grass. The boat slipped into the
water.
‘Coming, Mr. Frodo! Coming!’ called Sam, and ﬂung himself
from the bank, clutching at the departing boat. He missed it by a
yard. With a cry and a splash he fell face downward into deep swift
water. Gurgling he went under, and the River closed over his curly
head.
An exclamation of dismay came from the empty boat. A paddle
swirled and the boat put about. Frodo was just in time to grasp Sam

by the hair as he came up, bubbling and struggling. Fear was staring
in his round brown eyes.
‘Up you come, Sam my lad!’ said Frodo. ‘Now take my hand!’
‘Save me, Mr. Frodo!’ gasped Sam. ‘I’m drownded. I can’t see
your hand.’
‘Here it is. Don’t pinch, lad! I won’t let you go. Tread water and
don’t ﬂounder, or you’ll upset the boat. There now, get hold of the
side, and let me use the paddle!’
With a few strokes Frodo brought the boat back to the bank, and
Sam was able to scramble out, wet as a water-rat. Frodo took off the
Ring and stepped ashore again.
‘Of all the confounded nuisances you are the worst, Sam!’ he said.
‘Oh, Mr. Frodo, that’s hard!’ said Sam shivering. ‘That’s hard,
trying to go without me and all. If I hadn’t a guessed right, where
would you be now?’
‘Safely on my way.’
‘Safely!’ said Sam. ‘All alone and without me to help you? I
couldn’t have a borne it, it’d have been the death of me.’
‘It would be the death of you to come with me, Sam,’ said Frodo,
‘and I could not have borne that.’
‘Not as certain as being left behind,’ said Sam.
‘But I am going to Mordor.’
‘I know that well enough, Mr. Frodo. Of course you are. And I’m
coming with you.’
‘Now, Sam,’ said Frodo, ‘don’t hinder me! The others will be
coming back at any minute. If they catch me here, I shall have to
argue and explain, and I shall never have the heart or the chance to
get off. But I must go at once. It’s the only way.’
‘Of course it is,’ answered Sam. ‘But not alone. I’m coming too,
or neither of us isn’t going. I’ll knock holes in all the boats ﬁrst.’
Frodo actually laughed. A sudden warmth and gladness touched
his heart. ‘Leave one!’ he said. ‘We’ll need it. But you can’t come
like this without your gear or food or anything.’
‘Just hold on a moment, and I’ll get my stuff !’ cried Sam eagerly.
‘It’s all ready. I thought we should be off today.’ He rushed to the
camping place, ﬁshed out his pack from the pile where Frodo had
laid it when he emptied the boat of his companions’ goods, grabbed
a spare blanket, and some extra packages of food, and ran back.
‘So all my plan is spoilt!’ said Frodo. ‘It is no good trying to escape
you. But I’m glad, Sam. I cannot tell you how glad. Come along! It
is plain that we were meant to go together. We will go, and may the
others ﬁnd a safe road! Strider will look after them. I don’t suppose
we shall see them again.’
‘Yet we may, Mr. Frodo. We may,’ said Sam.
*
*
*

So Frodo and Sam set off on the last stage of the Quest together.
Frodo paddled away from the shore, and the River bore them swiftly
away, down the western arm, and past the frowning cliffs of Tol
Brandir. The roar of the great falls drew nearer. Even with such help
as Sam could give, it was hard work to pass across the current at the
southward end of the island and drive the boat eastward towards the
far shore.
At length they came to land again upon the southern slopes of
Amon Lhaw. There they found a shelving shore, and they drew the
boat out, high above the water, and hid it as well as they could behind
a great boulder. Then shouldering their burdens, they set off, seeking
a path that would bring them over the grey hills of the Emyn Muil,
and down into the Land of Shadow.

.

T H E  T W O
T O W E R S
BEING THE SECOND PART OF
The Lord of the Rings

.

BOOK THREE

.

Chapter 1
T H E  D E P A R T U R E  O F  B O R O M I R
Aragorn sped on up the hill. Every now and again he bent to the
ground. Hobbits go light, and their footprints are not easy even for
a Ranger to read, but not far from the top a spring crossed the path,
and in the wet earth he saw what he was seeking.
‘I read the signs aright,’ he said to himself. ‘Frodo ran to the
hill-top. I wonder what he saw there? But he returned by the same
way, and went down the hill again.’
Aragorn hesitated. He desired to go to the high seat himself,
hoping to see there something that would guide him in his per-
plexities; but time was pressing. Suddenly he leaped forward, and
ran to the summit, across the great ﬂag-stones, and up the steps.
Then sitting in the high seat he looked out. But the sun seemed
darkened, and the world dim and remote. He turned from the North
back again to North, and saw nothing save the distant hills, unless
it were that far away he could see again a great bird like an eagle
high in the air, descending slowly in wide circles down towards the
earth.
Even as he gazed his quick ears caught sounds in the woodlands
below, on the west side of the River. He stiffened. There were cries,
and among them, to his horror, he could distinguish the harsh voices
of Orcs. Then suddenly with a deep-throated call a great horn blew,
and the blasts of it smote the hills and echoed in the hollows, rising
in a mighty shout above the roaring of the falls.
‘The horn of Boromir!’ he cried. ‘He is in need!’ He sprang down
the steps and away, leaping down the path. ‘Alas! An ill fate is on
me this day, and all that I do goes amiss. Where is Sam?’
As he ran the cries came louder, but fainter now and desperately
the horn was blowing. Fierce and shrill rose the yells of the Orcs,
and suddenly the horn-calls ceased. Aragorn raced down the last
slope, but before he could reach the hill’s foot, the sounds died away;
and as he turned to the left and ran towards them they retreated,
until at last he could hear them no more. Drawing his bright sword
and crying Elendil! Elendil! he crashed through the trees.
A mile, maybe, from Parth Galen in a little glade not far from the
lake he found Boromir. He was sitting with his back to a great tree,
as if he was resting. But Aragorn saw that he was pierced with many
black-feathered arrows; his sword was still in his hand, but it was

broken near the hilt; his horn cloven in two was at his side. Many
Orcs lay slain, piled all about him and at his feet.
Aragorn knelt beside him. Boromir opened his eyes and strove to
speak. At last slow words came. ‘I tried to take the Ring from Frodo,’ he
said. ‘I am sorry. I have paid.’ His glance strayed to his fallen enemies;
twenty at least lay there. ‘They have gone: the Halﬂings: the Orcs have
taken them. I think they are not dead. Orcs bound them.’ He paused
and his eyes closed wearily. After a moment he spoke again.
‘Farewell, Aragorn! Go to Minas Tirith and save my people! I
have failed.’
‘No!’ said Aragorn, taking his hand and kissing his brow. ‘You
have conquered. Few have gained such a victory. Be at peace! Minas
Tirith shall not fall!’
Boromir smiled.
‘Which way did they go? Was Frodo there?’ said Aragorn.
But Boromir did not speak again.
‘Alas!’ said Aragorn. ‘Thus passes the heir of Denethor, Lord of
the Tower of Guard! This is a bitter end. Now the Company is all
in ruin. It is I that have failed. Vain was Gandalf ’s trust in me. What
shall I do now? Boromir has laid it on me to go to Minas Tirith, and
my heart desires it; but where are the Ring and the Bearer? How
shall I ﬁnd them and save the Quest from disaster?’
He knelt for a while, bent with weeping, still clasping Boromir’s
hand. So it was that Legolas and Gimli found him. They came from
the western slopes of the hill, silently, creeping through the trees as
if they were hunting. Gimli had his axe in hand, and Legolas his long
knife: all his arrows were spent. When they came into the glade they
halted in amazement; and then they stood a moment with heads
bowed in grief, for it seemed to them plain what had happened.
‘Alas!’ said Legolas, coming to Aragorn’s side. ‘We have hunted
and slain many Orcs in the woods, but we should have been of more
use here. We came when we heard the horn – but too late, it seems.
I fear you have taken deadly hurt.’
‘Boromir is dead,’ said Aragorn. ‘I am unscathed, for I was not
here with him. He fell defending the hobbits, while I was away upon
the hill.’
‘The hobbits!’ cried Gimli. ‘Where are they then? Where is Frodo?’
‘I do not know,’ answered Aragorn wearily. ‘Before he died
Boromir told me that the Orcs had bound them; he did not think
that they were dead. I sent him to follow Merry and Pippin; but I did
not ask him if Frodo or Sam were with him: not until it was too late.
All that I have done today has gone amiss. What is to be done now?’
‘First we must tend the fallen,’ said Legolas. ‘We cannot leave
him lying like carrion among these foul Orcs.’

‘But we must be swift,’ said Gimli. ‘He would not wish us to
linger. We must follow the Orcs, if there is hope that any of our
Company are living prisoners.’
‘But we do not know whether the Ring-bearer is with them or
not,’ said Aragorn. ‘Are we to abandon him? Must we not seek him
ﬁrst? An evil choice is now before us!’
‘Then let us do ﬁrst what we must do,’ said Legolas. ‘We have
not the time or the tools to bury our comrade ﬁtly, or to raise a
mound over him. A cairn we might build.’
‘The labour would be hard and long: there are no stones that we
could use nearer than the water-side,’ said Gimli.
‘Then let us lay him in a boat with his weapons, and the weapons
of his vanquished foes,’ said Aragorn. ‘We will send him to the Falls
of Rauros and give him to Anduin. The River of Gondor will take
care at least that no evil creature dishonours his bones.’
Quickly they searched the bodies of the Orcs, gathering their
swords and cloven helms and shields into a heap.
‘See!’ cried Aragorn. ‘Here we ﬁnd tokens!’ He picked out from
the pile of grim weapons two knives, leaf-bladed, damasked in gold
and red; and searching further he found also the sheaths, black, set
with small red gems. ‘No orc-tools these!’ he said. ‘They were borne
by the hobbits. Doubtless the Orcs despoiled them, but feared to
keep the knives, knowing them for what they are: work of Wester-
nesse, wound about with spells for the bane of Mordor. Well, now,
if they still live, our friends are weaponless. I will take these things,
hoping against hope, to give them back.’
‘And I,’ said Legolas, ‘will take all the arrows that I can ﬁnd, for
my quiver is empty.’ He searched in the pile and on the ground about
and found not a few that were undamaged and longer in the shaft
than such arrows as the Orcs were accustomed to use. He looked at
them closely.
And Aragorn looked on the slain, and he said: ‘Here lie many that
are not folk of Mordor. Some are from the North, from the Misty
Mountains, if I know anything of Orcs and their kinds. And here are
others strange to me. Their gear is not after the manner of Orcs at
all!’
There were four goblin-soldiers of greater stature, swart, slant-
eyed, with thick legs and large hands. They were armed with short
broad-bladed swords, not with the curved scimitars usual with Orcs;
and they had bows of yew, in length and shape like the bows of Men.
Upon their shields they bore a strange device: a small white hand in
the centre of a black ﬁeld; on the front of their iron helms was set
an S-rune, wrought of some white metal.

‘I have not seen these tokens before,’ said Aragorn. ‘What do they
mean?’
‘S is for Sauron,’ said Gimli. ‘That is easy to read.’
‘Nay!’ said Legolas. ‘Sauron does not use the elf-runes.’
‘Neither does he use his right name, nor permit it to be spelt or
spoken,’ said Aragorn. ‘And he does not use white. The Orcs in the
service of Barad-duˆr use the sign of the Red Eye.’ He stood for a
moment in thought. ‘S is for Saruman, I guess,’ he said at length.
‘There is evil afoot in Isengard, and the West is no longer safe. It is
as Gandalf feared: by some means the traitor Saruman has had news
of our journey. It is likely too that he knows of Gandalf ’s fall. Pursuers
from Moria may have escaped the vigilance of Lo´rien, or they may
have avoided that land and come to Isengard by other paths. Orcs
travel fast. But Saruman has many ways of learning news. Do you
remember the birds?’
‘Well, we have no time to ponder riddles,’ said Gimli. ‘Let us bear
Boromir away!’
‘But after that we must guess the riddles, if we are to choose our
course rightly,’ answered Aragorn.
‘Maybe there is no right choice,’ said Gimli.
Taking his axe the Dwarf now cut several branches. These they
lashed together with bowstrings, and spread their cloaks upon the
frame. Upon this rough bier they carried the body of their companion
to the shore, together with such trophies of his last battle as they
chose to send forth with him. It was only a short way, yet they found
it no easy task, for Boromir was a man both tall and strong.
At the water-side Aragorn remained, watching the bier, while
Legolas and Gimli hastened back on foot to Parth Galen. It was a
mile or more, and it was some time before they came back, paddling
two boats swiftly along the shore.
‘There is a strange tale to tell!’ said Legolas. ‘There are only two
boats upon the bank. We could ﬁnd no trace of the other.’
‘Have Orcs been there?’ asked Aragorn.
‘We saw no signs of them,’ answered Gimli. ‘And Orcs would
have taken or destroyed all the boats, and the baggage as well.’
‘I will look at the ground when we come there,’ said Aragorn.
Now they laid Boromir in the middle of the boat that was to bear
him away. The grey hood and elven-cloak they folded and placed
beneath his head. They combed his long dark hair and arrayed it
upon his shoulders. The golden belt of Lo´ rien gleamed about his
waist. His helm they set beside him, and across his lap they laid the
cloven horn and the hilt and shards of his sword; beneath his feet

they put the swords of his enemies. Then fastening the prow to the
stern of the other boat, they drew him out into the water. They rowed
sadly along the shore, and turning into the swift-running channel
they passed the green sward of Parth Galen. The steep sides of Tol
Brandir were glowing: it was now mid-afternoon. As they went south
the fume of Rauros rose and shimmered before them, a haze of gold.
The rush and thunder of the falls shook the windless air.
Sorrowfully they cast loose the funeral boat: there Boromir lay,
restful, peaceful, gliding upon the bosom of the ﬂowing water. The
stream took him while they held their own boat back with their
paddles. He ﬂoated by them, and slowly his boat departed, waning
to a dark spot against the golden light; and then suddenly it vanished.
Rauros roared on unchanging. The River had taken Boromir son of
Denethor, and he was not seen again in Minas Tirith, standing as
he used to stand upon the White Tower in the morning. But in
Gondor in after-days it long was said that the elven-boat rode the
falls and the foaming pool, and bore him down through Osgiliath,
and past the many mouths of Anduin, out into the Great Sea at night
under the stars.
For a while the three companions remained silent, gazing after
him. Then Aragorn spoke. ‘They will look for him from the White
Tower,’ he said, ‘but he will not return from mountain or from sea.’
Then slowly he began to sing:
Through Rohan over fen and ﬁeld where the long grass grows
The West Wind comes walking, and about the walls it goes.
‘What news from the West, O wandering wind, do you bring to
me tonight?
Have you seen Boromir the Tall by moon or by starlight?’
‘I saw him ride over seven streams, over waters wide and grey;
I saw him walk in empty lands, until he passed away
Into the shadows of the North. I saw him then no more.
The North Wind may have heard the horn of the son of
Denethor.’
‘O Boromir! From the high walls westward I looked afar,
But you came not from the empty lands where no men are.’
Then Legolas sang:
From the mouths of the Sea the South Wind ﬂies, from the
sandhills and the stones;
The wailing of the gulls it bears, and at the gate it moans.

‘What news from the South, O sighing wind, do you bring to me
at eve?
Where now is Boromir the Fair? He tarries and I grieve.’
‘Ask not of me where he doth dwell – so many bones there lie
On the white shores and the dark shores under the stormy sky;
So many have passed down Anduin to ﬁnd the ﬂowing Sea.
Ask of the North Wind news of them the North Wind sends to
me!’
‘O Boromir! Beyond the gate the seaward road runs south,
But you came not with the wailing gulls from the grey sea’s
mouth.’
Then Aragorn sang again:
From the Gate of Kings the North Wind rides, and past the
roaring falls;
And clear and cold about the tower its loud horn calls.
‘What news from the North, O mighty wind, do you bring to me
today?
What news of Boromir the Bold? For he is long away.’
‘Beneath Amon Hen I heard his cry. There many foes he fought.
His cloven shield, his broken sword, they to the water brought.
His head so proud, his face so fair, his limbs they laid to rest;
And Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, bore him upon its breast.’
‘O Boromir! The Tower of Guard shall ever northward gaze
To Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, until the end of days.’
So they ended. Then they turned their boat and drove it with all
the speed they could against the stream back to Parth Galen.
‘You left the East Wind to me,’ said Gimli, ‘but I will say naught
of it.’
‘That is as it should be,’ said Aragorn. ‘In Minas Tirith they endure
the East Wind, but they do not ask it for tidings. But now Boromir
has taken his road, and we must make haste to choose our own.’
He surveyed the green lawn, quickly but thoroughly, stooping
often to the earth. ‘No Orcs have been on this ground,’ he said.
‘Otherwise nothing can be made out for certain. All our footprints
are here, crossing and re-crossing. I cannot tell whether any of the
hobbits have come back since the search for Frodo began.’ He
returned to the bank, close to where the rill from the spring trickled
out into the River. ‘There are some clear prints here,’ he said. ‘A
hobbit waded out into the water and back; but I cannot say how long
ago.’
‘How then do you read this riddle?’ asked Gimli.

Aragorn did not answer at once, but went back to the camping-
place and looked at the baggage. ‘Two packs are missing,’ he said,
‘and one is certainly Sam’s: it was rather large and heavy. This then
is the answer: Frodo has gone by boat, and his servant has gone with
him. Frodo must have returned while we were all away. I met Sam
going up the hill and told him to follow me; but plainly he did not
do so. He guessed his master’s mind and came back here before
Frodo had gone. He did not ﬁnd it easy to leave Sam behind!’
‘But why should he leave us behind, and without a word?’ said
Gimli. ‘That was a strange deed!’
‘And a brave deed,’ said Aragorn. ‘Sam was right, I think. Frodo
did not wish to lead any friend to death with him in Mordor. But he
knew that he must go himself. Something happened after he left us
that overcame his fear and doubt.’
‘Maybe hunting Orcs came on him and he ﬂed,’ said Legolas.
‘He ﬂed, certainly,’ said Aragorn, ‘but not, I think, from Orcs.’
What he thought was the cause of Frodo’s sudden resolve and ﬂight
Aragorn did not say. The last words of Boromir he long kept secret.
‘Well, so much at least is now clear,’ said Legolas: ‘Frodo is no
longer on this side of the River: only he can have taken the boat.
And Sam is with him; only he would have taken his pack.’
‘Our choice then,’ said Gimli, ‘is either to take the remaining boat
and follow Frodo, or else to follow the Orcs on foot. There is little
hope either way. We have already lost precious hours.’
‘Let me think!’ said Aragorn. ‘And now may I make a right choice,
and change the evil fate of this unhappy day!’ He stood silent for a
moment. ‘I will follow the Orcs,’ he said at last. ‘I would have guided
Frodo to Mordor and gone with him to the end; but if I seek him
now in the wilderness, I must abandon the captives to torment and
death. My heart speaks clearly at last: the fate of the Bearer is in my
hands no longer. The Company has played its part. Yet we that
remain cannot forsake our companions while we have strength left.
Come! We will go now. Leave all that can be spared behind! We will
press on by day and dark!’
They drew up the last boat and carried it to the trees. They laid
beneath it such of their goods as they did not need and could not
carry away. Then they left Parth Galen. The afternoon was fading
as they came back to the glade where Boromir had fallen. There they
picked up the trail of the Orcs. It needed little skill to ﬁnd.
‘No other folk make such a trampling,’ said Legolas. ‘It seems
their delight to slash and beat down growing things that are not even
in their way.’
‘But they go with a great speed for all that,’ said Aragorn, ‘and

they do not tire. And later we may have to search for our path in
hard bare lands.’
‘Well, after them!’ said Gimli. ‘Dwarves too can go swiftly, and
they do not tire sooner than Orcs. But it will be a long chase: they
have a long start.’
‘Yes,’ said Aragorn, ‘we shall all need the endurance of Dwarves.
But come! With hope or without hope we will follow the trail of
our enemies. And woe to them, if we prove the swifter! We will
make such a chase as shall be accounted a marvel among the Three
Kindreds: Elves, Dwarves, and Men. Forth the Three Hunters!’
Like a deer he sprang away. Through the trees he sped. On and
on he led them, tireless and swift, now that his mind was at last made
up. The woods about the lake they left behind. Long slopes they
climbed, dark, hard-edged against the sky already red with sunset.
Dusk came. They passed away, grey shadows in a stony land.

Chapter 2
T H E  R I D E R S  O F  R O H A N
Dusk deepened. Mist lay behind them among the trees below, and
brooded on the pale margins of the Anduin, but the sky was clear.
Stars came out. The waxing moon was riding in the West, and the
shadows of the rocks were black. They had come to the feet of stony
hills, and their pace was slower, for the trail was no longer easy to
follow. Here the highlands of the Emyn Muil ran from North to
South in two long tumbled ridges. The western side of each ridge
was steep and difﬁcult, but the eastward slopes were gentler, furrowed
with many gullies and narrow ravines. All night the three companions
scrambled in this bony land, climbing to the crest of the ﬁrst and
tallest ridge, and down again into the darkness of a deep winding
valley on the other side.
There in the still cool hour before dawn they rested for a brief
space. The moon had long gone down before them, the stars glittered
above them; the ﬁrst light of day had not yet come over the dark
hills behind. For the moment Aragorn was at a loss: the orc-trail had
descended into the valley, but there it had vanished.
‘Which way would they turn, do you think?’ said Legolas. ‘North-
ward to take a straighter road to Isengard, or Fangorn, if that is their
aim as you guess? Or southward to strike the Entwash?’
‘They will not make for the river, whatever mark they aim at,’
said Aragorn. ‘And unless there is much amiss in Rohan and the
power of Saruman is greatly increased, they will take the shortest
way that they can ﬁnd over the ﬁelds of the Rohirrim. Let us search
northwards!’
The dale ran like a stony trough between the ridged hills, and a
trickling stream ﬂowed among the boulders at the bottom. A cliff
frowned upon their right; to their left rose grey slopes, dim and
shadowy in the late night. They went on for a mile or more north-
wards. Aragorn was searching, bent towards the ground, among the
folds and gullies leading up into the western ridge. Legolas was some
way ahead. Suddenly the Elf gave a cry and the others came running
towards him.
‘We have already overtaken some of those that we are hunting,’
he said. ‘Look!’ He pointed, and they saw that what they had at ﬁrst
taken to be boulders lying at the foot of the slope were huddled
bodies. Five dead Orcs lay there. They had been hewn with many

cruel strokes, and two had been beheaded. The ground was wet with
their dark blood.
‘Here is another riddle!’ said Gimli. ‘But it needs the light of day,
and for that we cannot wait.’
‘Yet however you read it, it seems not unhopeful,’ said Legolas.
‘Enemies of the Orcs are likely to be our friends. Do any folk dwell
in these hills?’
‘No,’ said Aragorn. ‘The Rohirrim seldom come here, and it is
far from Minas Tirith. It might be that some company of Men were
hunting here for reasons that we do not know. Yet I think not.’
‘What do you think?’ said Gimli.
‘I think that the enemy brought his own enemy with him,’
answered Aragorn. ‘These are Northern Orcs from far away. Among
the slain are none of the great Orcs with the strange badges. There
was a quarrel, I guess: it is no uncommon thing with these foul folk.
Maybe there was some dispute about the road.’
‘Or about the captives,’ said Gimli. ‘Let us hope that they, too,
did not meet their end here.’
Aragorn searched the ground in a wide circle, but no other traces
of the ﬁght could be found. They went on. Already the eastward sky
was turning pale; the stars were fading, and a grey light was slowly
growing. A little further north they came to a fold in which a tiny
stream, falling and winding, had cut a stony path down into the
valley. In it some bushes grew, and there were patches of grass upon
its sides.
‘At last!’ said Aragorn. ‘Here are the tracks that we seek! Up this
water-channel: this is the way that the Orcs went after their debate.’
Swiftly now the pursuers turned and followed the new path. As if
fresh from a night’s rest they sprang from stone to stone. At last they
reached the crest of the grey hill, and a sudden breeze blew in their
hair and stirred their cloaks: the chill wind of dawn.
Turning back they saw across the River the far hills kindled. Day
leaped into the sky. The red rim of the sun rose over the shoulders
of the dark land. Before them in the West the world lay still, formless
and grey; but even as they looked, the shadows of night melted, the
colours of the waking earth returned: green ﬂowed over the wide
meads of Rohan; the white mists shimmered in the water-vales; and
far off to the left, thirty leagues or more, blue and purple stood the
White Mountains, rising into peaks of jet, tipped with glimmering
snows, ﬂushed with the rose of morning.
‘Gondor! Gondor!’ cried Aragorn. ‘Would that I looked on you
again in happier hour! Not yet does my road lie southward to your
bright streams.

Gondor! Gondor, between the Mountains and the Sea!
West Wind blew there; the light upon the Silver Tree
Fell like bright rain in gardens of the Kings of old.
O proud walls! White towers! O winge´d crown and throne of gold!
O Gondor, Gondor! Shall Men behold the Silver Tree,
Or West Wind blow again between the Mountains and the Sea?
Now let us go!’ he said, drawing his eyes away from the South, and
looking out west and north to the way that he must tread.
The ridge upon which the companions stood went down steeply
before their feet. Below it twenty fathoms or more, there was a wide
and rugged shelf which ended suddenly in the brink of a sheer cliff: the
East Wall of Rohan. So ended the Emyn Muil, and the green plains of
the Rohirrim stretched away before them to the edge of sight.
‘Look!’ cried Legolas, pointing up into the pale sky above them.
‘There is the eagle again! He is very high. He seems to be ﬂying now
away, from this land back to the North. He is going with great speed.
Look!’
‘No, not even my eyes can see him, my good Legolas,’ said
Aragorn. ‘He must be far aloft indeed. I wonder what is his errand,
if he is the same bird that I have seen before. But look! I can see
something nearer at hand and more urgent; there is something
moving over the plain!’
‘Many things,’ said Legolas. ‘It is a great company on foot; but I
cannot say more, nor see what kind of folk they may be. They are
many leagues away: twelve, I guess; but the ﬂatness of the plain is
hard to measure.’
‘I think, nonetheless, that we no longer need any trail to tell us
which way to go,’ said Gimli. ‘Let us ﬁnd a path down to the ﬁelds
as quick as may be.’
‘I doubt if you will ﬁnd a path quicker than the one that the Orcs
chose,’ said Aragorn.
They followed their enemies now by the clear light of day. It
seemed that the Orcs had pressed on with all possible speed. Every
now and again the pursuers found things that had been dropped or
cast away: food-bags, the rinds and crusts of hard grey bread, a torn
black cloak, a heavy iron-nailed shoe broken on the stones. The trail
led them north along the top of the escarpment, and at length they
came to a deep cleft carved in the rock by a stream that splashed
noisily down. In the narrow ravine a rough path descended like a
steep stair into the plain.
At the bottom they came with a strange suddenness on the grass
of Rohan. It swelled like a green sea up to the very foot of the Emyn

Muil. The falling stream vanished into a deep growth of cresses and
water-plants, and they could hear it tinkling away in green tunnels,
down long gentle slopes towards the fens of Entwash Vale far away.
They seemed to have left winter clinging to the hills behind. Here
the air was softer and warmer, and faintly scented, as if spring was
already stirring and the sap was ﬂowing again in herb and leaf. Legolas
took a deep breath, like one that drinks a great draught after long
thirst in barren places.
‘Ah! the green smell!’ he said. ‘It is better than much sleep. Let
us run!’
‘Light feet may run swiftly here,’ said Aragorn. ‘More swiftly,
maybe, than iron-shod Orcs. Now we have a chance to lessen their
lead!’
They went in single ﬁle, running like hounds on a strong scent,
and an eager light was in their eyes. Nearly due west the broad swath
of the marching Orcs tramped its ugly slot; the sweet grass of Rohan
had been bruised and blackened as they passed. Presently Aragorn
gave a cry and turned aside.
‘Stay!’ he shouted. ‘Do not follow me yet!’ He ran quickly to the
right, away from the main trail; for he had seen footprints that went
that way, branching off from the others, the marks of small unshod
feet. These, however, did not go far before they were crossed by
orc-prints, also coming out from the main trail behind and in front,
and then they curved sharply back again and were lost in the tramp-
ling. At the furthest point Aragorn stooped and picked up something
from the grass; then he ran back.
‘Yes,’ he said, ‘they are quite plain: a hobbit’s footprints. Pippin’s,
I think. He is smaller than the others. And look at this!’ He held up
a thing that glittered in the sunlight. It looked like the new-opened
leaf of a beech-tree, fair and strange in that treeless plain.
‘The brooch of an elven-cloak!’ cried Legolas and Gimli together.
‘Not idly do the leaves of Lo´ rien fall,’ said Aragorn. ‘This did not
drop by chance: it was cast away as a token to any that might follow.
I think Pippin ran away from the trail for that purpose.’
‘Then he at least was alive,’ said Gimli. ‘And he had the use of
his wits, and of his legs too. That is heartening. We do not pursue
in vain.’
‘Let us hope that he did not pay too dearly for his boldness,’ said
Legolas. ‘Come! Let us go on! The thought of those merry young
folk driven like cattle burns my heart.’
The sun climbed to the noon and then rode slowly down the sky.
Light clouds came up out of the sea in the distant South and were

blown away upon the breeze. The sun sank. Shadows rose behind
and reached out long arms from the East. Still the hunters held on.
One day now had passed since Boromir fell, and the Orcs were yet
far ahead. No longer could any sight of them be seen in the level
plains.
As nightshade was closing about them Aragorn halted. Only twice
in the day’s march had they rested for a brief while, and twelve
leagues now lay between them and the eastern wall where they had
stood at dawn.
‘We have come at last to a hard choice,’ he said. ‘Shall we rest by
night, or shall we go on while our will and strength hold?’
‘Unless our enemies rest also, they will leave us far behind, if we
stay to sleep,’ said Legolas.
‘Surely even Orcs must pause on the march?’ said Gimli.
‘Seldom will Orcs journey in the open under the sun, yet these
have done so,’ said Legolas. ‘Certainly they will not rest by night.’
‘But if we walk by night, we cannot follow their trail,’ said Gimli.
‘The trail is straight, and turns neither right nor left, as far as my
eyes can see,’ said Legolas.
‘Maybe, I could lead you at guess in the darkness and hold to the
line,’ said Aragorn; ‘but if we strayed, or they turned aside, then
when light came there might be long delay before the trail was found
again.’
‘And there is this also,’ said Gimli: ‘only by day can we see if any
tracks lead away. If a prisoner should escape, or if one should be
carried off, eastward, say, to the Great River, towards Mordor, we
might pass the signs and never know it.’
‘That is true,’ said Aragorn. ‘But if I read the signs back yonder
rightly, the Orcs of the White Hand prevailed, and the whole company
is now bound for Isengard. Their present course bears me out.’
‘Yet it would be rash to be sure of their counsels,’ said Gimli.
‘And what of escape? In the dark we should have passed the signs
that led you to the brooch.’
‘The Orcs will be doubly on their guard since then, and the
prisoners even wearier,’ said Legolas. ‘There will be no escape again,
if we do not contrive it. How that is to be done cannot be guessed,
but ﬁrst we must overtake them.’
‘And yet even I, Dwarf of many journeys, and not the least hardy
of my folk, cannot run all the way to Isengard without any pause,’
said Gimli. ‘My heart burns me too, and I would have started sooner;
but now I must rest a little to run the better. And if we rest, then
the blind night is the time to do so.’
‘I said that it was a hard choice,’ said Aragorn. ‘How shall we end
this debate?’

‘You are our guide,’ said Gimli, ‘and you are skilled in the chase.
You shall choose.’
‘My heart bids me go on,’ said Legolas. ‘But we must hold
together. I will follow your counsel.’
‘You give the choice to an ill chooser,’ said Aragorn. ‘Since we
passed through the Argonath my choices have gone amiss.’ He fell
silent, gazing north and west into the gathering night for a long while.
‘We will not walk in the dark,’ he said at length. ‘The peril of
missing the trail or signs of other coming and going seems to me the
greater. If the Moon gave enough light, we would use it, but alas! he
sets early and is yet young and pale.’
‘And tonight he is shrouded anyway,’ Gimli murmured. ‘Would
that the Lady had given us a light, such a gift as she gave to Frodo!’
‘It will be more needed where it is bestowed,’ said Aragorn. ‘With
him lies the true Quest. Ours is but a small matter in the great deeds
of this time. A vain pursuit from its beginning, maybe, which no
choice of mine can mar or mend. Well, I have chosen. So let us use
the time as best we may!’
He cast himself on the ground and fell at once into sleep, for he
had not slept since their night under the shadow of Tol Brandir.
Before dawn was in the sky he woke and rose. Gimli was still deep
in slumber, but Legolas was standing, gazing northwards into the
darkness, thoughtful and silent as a young tree in a windless night.
‘They are far far away,’ he said sadly, turning to Aragorn. ‘I know
in my heart that they have not rested this night. Only an eagle could
overtake them now.’
‘Nonetheless we will still follow as we may,’ said Aragorn. Stooping
he roused the Dwarf. ‘Come! We must go,’ he said. ‘The scent is
growing cold.’
‘But it is still dark,’ said Gimli. ‘Even Legolas on a hill-top could
not see them till the Sun is up.’
‘I fear they have passed beyond my sight from hill or plain, under
moon or sun,’ said Legolas.
‘Where sight fails the earth may bring us rumour,’ said Aragorn.
‘The land must groan under their hated feet.’ He stretched himself
upon the ground with his ear pressed against the turf. He lay there
motionless, for so long a time that Gimli wondered if he had swooned
or fallen asleep again. Dawn came glimmering, and slowly a grey
light grew about them. At last he rose, and now his friends could see
his face: it was pale and drawn, and his look was troubled.
‘The rumour of the earth is dim and confused,’ he said. ‘Nothing
walks upon it for many miles about us. Faint and far are the feet of
our enemies. But loud are the hoofs of the horses. It comes to my

mind that I heard them, even as I lay on the ground in sleep, and
they troubled my dreams: horses galloping, passing in the West. But
now they are drawing ever further from us, riding northward. I
wonder what is happening in this land!’
‘Let us go!’ said Legolas.
So the third day of their pursuit began. During all its long hours
of cloud and ﬁtful sun they hardly paused, now striding, now running,
as if no weariness could quench the ﬁre that burned them. They
seldom spoke. Over the wide solitude they passed and their elven-
cloaks faded against the background of the grey-green ﬁelds; even in
the cool sunlight of mid-day few but Elvish eyes would have marked
them, until they were close at hand. Often in their hearts they thanked
the Lady of Lo´ rien for the gift of lembas, for they could eat of it and
ﬁnd new strength even as they ran.
All day the track of their enemies led straight on, going north-west
without a break or turn. As once again the day wore to its end they
came to long treeless slopes, where the land rose, swelling up towards
a line of low humpbacked downs ahead. The orc-trail grew fainter
as it bent north towards them, for the ground became harder and
the grass shorter. Far away to the left the river Entwash wound, a
silver thread in a green ﬂoor. No moving thing could be seen. Often
Aragorn wondered that they saw no sign of beast or man. The dwell-
ings of the Rohirrim were for the most part many leagues away to
the South, under the wooded eaves of the White Mountains, now
hidden in mist and cloud; yet the Horse-lords had formerly kept
many herds and studs in the Eastemnet, this easterly region of their
realm, and there the herdsmen had wandered much, living in camp
and tent, even in winter-time. But now all the land was empty, and
there was a silence that did not seem to be the quiet of peace.
At dusk they halted again. Now twice twelve leagues they had
passed over the plains of Rohan and the wall of the Emyn Muil was
lost in the shadows of the East. The young moon was glimmering in
a misty sky, but it gave small light, and the stars were veiled.
‘Now do I most grudge a time of rest or any halt in our chase,’
said Legolas. ‘The Orcs have run before us, as if the very whips of
Sauron were behind them. I fear they have already reached the forest
and the dark hills, and even now are passing into the shadows of the
trees.’
Gimli ground his teeth. ‘This is a bitter end to our hope and to
all our toil!’ he said.
‘To hope, maybe, but not to toil,’ said Aragorn. ‘We shall not
turn back here. Yet I am weary.’ He gazed back along the way that

they had come towards the night gathering in the East. ‘There is
something strange at work in this land. I distrust the silence. I distrust
even the pale Moon. The stars are faint; and I am weary as I have
seldom been before, weary as no Ranger should be with a clear trail
to follow. There is some will that lends speed to our foes and sets
an unseen barrier before us: a weariness that is in the heart more
than in the limb.’
‘Truly!’ said Legolas. ‘That I have known since ﬁrst we came down
from the Emyn Muil. For the will is not behind us but before us.’
He pointed away over the land of Rohan into the darkling West under
the sickle moon.
‘Saruman!’ muttered Aragorn. ‘But he shall not turn us back! Halt
we must once more; for, see! even the Moon is falling into gathering
cloud. But north lies our road between down and fen when day
returns.’
As before Legolas was ﬁrst afoot, if indeed he had ever slept.
‘Awake! Awake!’ he cried. ‘It is a red dawn. Strange things await us
by the eaves of the forest. Good or evil, I do not know; but we are
called. Awake!’
The others sprang up, and almost at once they set off again. Slowly
the downs drew near. It was still an hour before noon when they
reached them: green slopes rising to bare ridges that ran in a line
straight towards the North. At their feet the ground was dry and the
turf short, but a long strip of sunken land, some ten miles wide, lay
between them and the river wandering deep in dim thickets of reed
and rush. Just to the West of the southernmost slope there was a great
ring, where the turf had been torn and beaten by many trampling feet.
From it the orc-trail ran out again, turning north along the dry skirts
of the hills. Aragorn halted and examined the tracks closely.
‘They rested here a while,’ he said, ‘but even the outward trail is
already old. I fear that your heart spoke truly, Legolas: it is thrice
twelve hours, I guess, since the Orcs stood where we now stand. If
they held to their pace, then at sundown yesterday they would reach
the borders of Fangorn.’
‘I can see nothing away north or west but grass dwindling into
mist,’ said Gimli. ‘Could we see the forest, if we climbed the hills?’
‘It is still far away,’ said Aragorn. ‘If I remember rightly, these
downs run eight leagues or more to the north, and then north-west
to the issuing of the Entwash there lies still a wide land, another
ﬁfteen leagues it may be.’
‘Well, let us go on,’ said Gimli. ‘My legs must forget the miles.
They would be more willing, if my heart were less heavy.’
*
*
*

The sun was sinking when at last they drew near to the end of the
line of downs. For many hours they had marched without rest. They
were going slowly now, and Gimli’s back was bent. Stone-hard are
the Dwarves in labour or journey, but this endless chase began to
tell on him, as all hope failed in his heart. Aragorn walked behind
him, grim and silent, stooping now and again to scan some print or
mark upon the ground. Only Legolas still stepped as lightly as ever,
his feet hardly seeming to press the grass, leaving no footprints as he
passed; but in the waybread of the Elves he found all the sustenance
that he needed, and he could sleep, if sleep it could be called by
Men, resting his mind in the strange paths of Elvish dreams, even as
he walked open-eyed in the light of this world.
‘Let us go up on to this green hill!’ he said. Wearily they followed
him, climbing the long slope, until they came out upon the top. It was
a round hill smooth and bare, standing by itself, the most northerly of
the downs. The sun sank and the shadows of evening fell like a
curtain. They were alone in a grey formless world without mark or
measure. Only far away north-west there was a deeper darkness
against the dying light: the Mountains of Mist and the forest at their
feet.
‘Nothing can we see to guide us here,’ said Gimli. ‘Well, now we
must halt again and wear the night away. It is growing cold!’
‘The wind is north from the snows,’ said Aragorn.
‘And ere morning it will be in the East,’ said Legolas. ‘But rest,
if you must. Yet do not cast all hope away. Tomorrow is unknown.
Rede oft is found at the rising of the Sun.’
‘Three suns already have risen on our chase and brought no
counsel,’ said Gimli.
The night grew ever colder. Aragorn and Gimli slept ﬁtfully, and
whenever they awoke they saw Legolas standing beside them, or
walking to and fro, singing softly to himself in his own tongue, and
as he sang the white stars opened in the hard black vault above. So
the night passed. Together they watched the dawn grow slowly in
the sky, now bare and cloudless, until at last the sunrise came. It was
pale and clear. The wind was in the East and all the mists had rolled
away; wide lands lay bleak about them in the bitter light.
Ahead and eastward they saw the windy uplands of the Wold of
Rohan that they had already glimpsed many days ago from the Great
River. North-westward stalked the dark forest of Fangorn; still ten
leagues away stood its shadowy eaves, and its further slopes faded
into the distant blue. Beyond there glimmered far away, as if ﬂoating
on a grey cloud, the white head of tall Methedras, the last peak of
the Misty Mountains. Out of the forest the Entwash ﬂowed to meet

them, its stream now swift and narrow, and its banks deep-cloven.
The orc-trail turned from the downs towards it.
Following with his keen eyes the trail to the river, and then the
river back towards the forest, Aragorn saw a shadow on the distant
green, a dark swift-moving blur. He cast himself upon the ground
and listened again intently. But Legolas stood beside him, shading
his bright elven-eyes with his long slender hand, and he saw not a
shadow, nor a blur, but the small ﬁgures of horsemen, many horse-
men, and the glint of morning on the tips of their spears was like the
twinkle of minute stars beyond the edge of mortal sight. Far behind
them a dark smoke rose in thin curling threads.
There was a silence in the empty ﬁelds, and Gimli could hear the
air moving in the grass.
‘Riders!’ cried Aragorn, springing to his feet. ‘Many riders on swift
steeds are coming towards us!’
‘Yes,’ said Legolas, ‘there are one hundred and ﬁve. Yellow is
their hair, and bright are their spears. Their leader is very tall.’
Aragorn smiled. ‘Keen are the eyes of the Elves,’ he said.
‘Nay! The riders are little more than ﬁve leagues distant,’ said
Legolas.
‘Five leagues or one,’ said Gimli, ‘we cannot escape them in this
bare land. Shall we wait for them here or go on our way?’
‘We will wait,’ said Aragorn. ‘I am weary, and our hunt has failed.
Or at least others were before us; for these horsemen are riding back
down the orc-trail. We may get news from them.’
‘Or spears,’ said Gimli.
‘There are three empty saddles, but I see no hobbits,’ said Legolas.
‘I did not say that we should hear good news,’ said Aragorn. ‘But
evil or good we will await it here.’
The three companions now left the hill-top, where they might
be an easy mark against the pale sky, and they walked slowly down
the northward slope. A little above the hill’s foot they halted, and
wrapping their cloaks about them, they sat huddled together upon
the faded grass. The time passed slowly and heavily. The wind was
thin and searching. Gimli was uneasy.
‘What do you know of these horsemen, Aragorn?’ he said. ‘Do we
sit here waiting for sudden death?’
‘I have been among them,’ answered Aragorn. ‘They are proud
and wilful, but they are true-hearted, generous in thought and deed;
bold but not cruel; wise but unlearned, writing no books but singing
many songs, after the manner of the children of Men before the Dark
Years. But I do not know what has happened here of late, nor in
what mind the Rohirrim may now be between the traitor Saruman
and the threat of Sauron. They have long been the friends of the

people of Gondor, though they are not akin to them. It was in for-
gotten years long ago that Eorl the Young brought them out of the
North, and their kinship is rather with the Bardings of Dale, and
with the Beornings of the Wood, among whom may still be seen
many men tall and fair, as are the Riders of Rohan. At least they will
not love the Orcs.’
‘But Gandalf spoke of a rumour that they pay tribute to Mordor,’
said Gimli.
‘I believe it no more than did Boromir,’ answered Aragorn.
‘You will soon learn the truth,’ said Legolas. ‘Already they
approach.’
At length even Gimli could hear the distant beat of galloping hoofs.
The horsemen, following the trail, had turned from the river, and
were drawing near the downs. They were riding like the wind.
Now the cries of clear strong voices came ringing over the ﬁelds.
Suddenly they swept up with a noise like thunder, and the foremost
horseman swerved, passing by the foot of the hill, and leading the
host back southward along the western skirts of the downs. After him
they rode: a long line of mail-clad men, swift, shining, fell and fair
to look upon.
Their horses were of great stature, strong and clean-limbed; their
grey coats glistened, their long tails ﬂowed in the wind, their manes
were braided on their proud necks. The Men that rode them matched
them well: tall and long-limbed; their hair, ﬂaxen-pale, ﬂowed under
their light helms, and streamed in long braids behind them; their
faces were stern and keen. In their hands were tall spears of ash,
painted shields were slung at their backs, long swords were at their
belts, their burnished shirts of mail hung down upon their knees.
In pairs they galloped by, and though every now and then one
rose in his stirrups and gazed ahead and to either side, they appeared
not to perceive the three strangers sitting silently and watching them.
The host had almost passed when suddenly Aragorn stood up, and
called in a loud voice:
‘What news from the North, Riders of Rohan?’
With astonishing speed and skill they checked their steeds,
wheeled, and came charging round. Soon the three companions
found themselves in a ring of horsemen moving in a running circle,
up the hill-slope behind them and down, round and round them,
and drawing ever inwards. Aragorn stood silent, and the other two
sat without moving, wondering what way things would turn.
Without a word or cry, suddenly, the Riders halted. A thicket of
spears were pointed towards the strangers; and some of the horsemen

had bows in hand, and their arrows were already ﬁtted to the string.
Then one rode forward, a tall man, taller than all the rest; from his
helm as a crest a white horsetail ﬂowed. He advanced until the point
of his spear was within a foot of Aragorn’s breast. Aragorn did not
stir.
‘Who are you, and what are you doing in this land?’ said the Rider,
using the Common Speech of the West, in manner and tone like to
the speech of Boromir, Man of Gondor.
‘I am called Strider,’ answered Aragorn. ‘I came out of the North.
I am hunting Orcs.’
The Rider leaped from his horse. Giving his spear to another who
rode up and dismounted at his side, he drew his sword and stood
face to face with Aragorn, surveying him keenly, and not without
wonder. At length he spoke again.
‘At ﬁrst I thought that you yourselves were Orcs,’ he said; ‘but
now I see that it is not so. Indeed you know little of Orcs, if you go
hunting them in this fashion. They were swift and well-armed, and
they were many. You would have changed from hunters to prey, if
ever you had overtaken them. But there is something strange about
you, Strider.’ He bent his clear bright eyes again upon the Ranger.
‘That is no name for a Man that you give. And strange too is your
raiment. Have you sprung out of the grass? How did you escape our
sight? Are you Elvish folk?’
‘No,’ said Aragorn. ‘One only of us is an Elf, Legolas from the
Woodland Realm in distant Mirkwood. But we have passed through
Lothlo´ rien, and the gifts and favour of the Lady go with us.’
The Rider looked at them with renewed wonder, but his eyes
hardened. ‘Then there is a Lady in the Golden Wood, as old tales
tell!’ he said. ‘Few escape her nets, they say. These are strange days!
But if you have her favour, then you also are net-weavers and
sorcerers, maybe.’ He turned a cold glance suddenly upon Legolas
and Gimli. ‘Why do you not speak, silent ones?’ he demanded.
Gimli rose and planted his feet ﬁrmly apart: his hand gripped the
handle of his axe, and his dark eyes ﬂashed. ‘Give me your name,
horse-master, and I will give you mine, and more besides,’ he said.
‘As for that,’ said the Rider, staring down at the Dwarf, ‘the
stranger should declare himself ﬁrst. Yet I am named Eomer son of
´
Eomund, and am called the Third Marshal of Riddermark.’
´
´
´
‘Then Eomer son of Eomund, Third Marshal of Riddermark, let
Gimli the Dwarf Glo´ in’s son warn you against foolish words. You
speak evil of that which is fair beyond the reach of your thought, and
only little wit can excuse you.’
´Eomer’s eyes blazed, and the Men of Rohan murmured angrily,
and closed in, advancing their spears. ‘I would cut off your head,

beard and all, Master Dwarf, if it stood but a little higher from the
ground,’ said Eomer.
´
‘He stands not alone,’ said Legolas, bending his bow and ﬁtting
an arrow with hands that moved quicker than sight. ‘You would die
before your stroke fell.’
Eomer raised his sword, and things might have gone ill, but
´
Aragorn sprang between them, and raised his hand. ‘Your pardon,
´Eomer!’ he cried. ‘When you know more you will understand why
you have angered my companions. We intend no evil to Rohan, nor
to any of its folk, neither to man nor to horse. Will you not hear our
tale before you strike?’
‘I will,’ said Eomer lowering his blade. ‘But wanderers in the
´
Riddermark would be wise to be less haughty in these days of doubt.
First tell me your right name.’
‘First tell me whom you serve,’ said Aragorn. ‘Are you friend or
foe of Sauron, the Dark Lord of Mordor?’
‘I serve only the Lord of the Mark, The´oden King son of Thengel,’
answered Eomer. ‘We do not serve the Power of the Black Land far
´
away, but neither are we yet at open war with him; and if you are
ﬂeeing from him, then you had best leave this land. There is trouble
now on all our borders, and we are threatened; but we desire only
to be free, and to live as we have lived, keeping our own, and serving
no foreign lord, good or evil. We welcomed guests kindly in the better
days, but in these times the unbidden stranger ﬁnds us swift and
hard. Come! Who are you? Whom do you serve? At whose command
do you hunt Orcs in our land?’
‘I serve no man,’ said Aragorn; ‘but the servants of Sauron I pursue
into whatever land they may go. There are few among mortal Men
who know more of Orcs; and I do not hunt them in this fashion out
of choice. The Orcs whom we pursued took captive two of my friends.
In such need a man that has no horse will go on foot, and he will
not ask for leave to follow the trail. Nor will he count the heads of
the enemy save with a sword. I am not weaponless.’
Aragorn threw back his cloak. The elven-sheath glittered as he
grasped it, and the bright blade of Andu´ ril shone like a sudden
ﬂame as he swept it out. ‘Elendil!’ he cried. ‘I am Aragorn son of
Arathorn, and am called Elessar, the Elfstone, Du´nadan, the heir
of Isildur Elendil’s son of Gondor. Here is the Sword that was
Broken and is forged again! Will you aid me or thwart me? Choose
swiftly!’
Gimli and Legolas looked at their companion in amazement, for
they had not seen him in this mood before. He seemed to have grown
in stature while Eomer had shrunk; and in his living face they caught
´
a brief vision of the power and majesty of the kings of stone. For a

moment it seemed to the eyes of Legolas that a white ﬂame ﬂickered
on the brows of Aragorn like a shining crown.
Eomer stepped back and a look of awe was in his face. He cast
´
down his proud eyes. ‘These are indeed strange days,’ he muttered.
‘Dreams and legends spring to life out of the grass.
‘Tell me, lord,’ he said, ‘what brings you here? And what was the
meaning of the dark words? Long has Boromir son of Denethor been
gone seeking an answer, and the horse that we lent him came back
riderless. What doom do you bring out of the North?’
‘The doom of choice,’ said Aragorn. ‘You may say this to The´oden
son of Thengel: open war lies before him, with Sauron or against
him. None may live now as they have lived, and few shall keep what
they call their own. But of these great matters we will speak later. If
chance allows, I will come myself to the king. Now I am in great
need, and I ask for help, or at least for tidings. You heard that we
are pursuing an orc-host that carried off our friends. What can you
tell us?’
‘That you need not pursue them further,’ said Eomer. ‘The Orcs
´
are destroyed.’
‘And our friends?’
‘We found none but Orcs.’
‘But that is strange indeed,’ said Aragorn. ‘Did you search the
slain? Were there no bodies other than those of orc-kind? They would
be small, only children to your eyes, unshod but clad in grey.’
‘There were no dwarves nor children,’ said Eomer. ‘We counted
´
all the slain and despoiled them, and then we piled the carcases and
burned them, as is our custom. The ashes are smoking still.’
‘We do not speak of dwarves or children,’ said Gimli. ‘Our friends
were hobbits.’
´
‘Hobbits?’ said Eomer. ‘And what may they be? It is a strange
name.’
‘A strange name for a strange folk,’ said Gimli. ‘But these were
very dear to us. It seems that you have heard in Rohan of the words
that troubled Minas Tirith. They spoke of the Halﬂing. These hobbits
are Halﬂings.’
´
‘Halﬂings!’ laughed the Rider that stood beside Eomer. ‘Halﬂings!
But they are only a little people in old songs and children’s tales out
of the North. Do we walk in legends or on the green earth in the
daylight?’
‘A man may do both,’ said Aragorn. ‘For not we but those who
come after will make the legends of our time. The green earth, say
you? That is a mighty matter of legend, though you tread it under
the light of day!’
‘Time is pressing,’ said the Rider, not heeding Aragorn. ‘We must

hasten south, lord. Let us leave these wild folk to their fancies. Or
let us bind them and take them to the king.’
‘Peace, Eothain!’ said Eomer in his own tongue. ‘Leave me a while.
´
´
Tell the e´ored to assemble on the path, and make ready to ride to the
Entwade.’
´
Muttering Eothain retired, and spoke to the others. Soon they
´
drew off and left Eomer alone with the three companions.
‘All that you say is strange, Aragorn,’ he said. ‘Yet you speak the
truth, that is plain: the Men of the Mark do not lie, and therefore
they are not easily deceived. But you have not told all. Will you not
now speak more fully of your errand, so that I may judge what to
do?’
‘I set out from Imladris, as it is named in the rhyme, many weeks
ago,’ answered Aragorn. ‘With me went Boromir of Minas Tirith.
My errand was to go to that city with the son of Denethor, to aid
his folk in their war against Sauron. But the Company that I journeyed
with had other business. Of that I cannot speak now. Gandalf the
Grey was our leader.’
´
‘Gandalf !’ Eomer exclaimed. ‘Gandalf Greyhame is known in the
Mark; but his name, I warn you, is no longer a password to the king’s
favour. He has been a guest in the land many times in the memory
of men, coming as he will, after a season, or after many years. He is
ever the herald of strange events: a bringer of evil, some now say.
‘Indeed since his last coming in the summer all things have gone
amiss. At that time our trouble with Saruman began. Until then we
counted Saruman our friend, but Gandalf came then and warned us
that sudden war was preparing in Isengard. He said that he himself
had been a prisoner in Orthanc and had hardly escaped, and he
begged for help. But The´oden would not listen to him, and he went
away. Speak not the name of Gandalf loudly in The´oden’s ears! He
is wroth. For Gandalf took the horse that is called Shadowfax, the
most precious of all the king’s steeds, chief of the Mearas, which only
the Lord of the Mark may ride. For the sire of their race was the
great horse of Eorl that knew the speech of Men. Seven nights ago
Shadowfax returned; but the king’s anger is not less, for now the
horse is wild and will let no man handle him.’
‘Then Shadowfax has found his way alone from the far North,’
said Aragorn; ‘for it was there that he and Gandalf parted. But alas!
Gandalf will ride no longer. He fell into darkness in the Mines of
Moria and comes not again.’
´
‘That is heavy tidings,’ said Eomer. ‘At least to me, and to many;
though not to all, as you may ﬁnd, if you come to the king.’
‘It is tidings more grievous than any in this land can understand,

though it may touch them sorely ere the year is much older,’ said
Aragorn. ‘But when the great fall, the less must lead. My part it has
been to guide our Company on the long road from Moria. Through
Lo´ rien we came – of which it were well that you should learn the
truth ere you speak of it again – and thence down the leagues of
the Great River to the falls of Rauros. There Boromir was slain by
the same Orcs whom you destroyed.’
´
‘Your news is all of woe!’ cried Eomer in dismay. ‘Great harm is
this death to Minas Tirith, and to us all. That was a worthy man!
All spoke his praise. He came seldom to the Mark, for he was ever
in the wars on the East-borders; but I have seen him. More like to
the swift sons of Eorl than to the grave Men of Gondor he seemed
to me, and likely to prove a great captain of his people when his time
came. But we have had no word of this grief out of Gondor. When
did he fall?’
‘It is now the fourth day since he was slain,’ answered Aragorn;
‘and since the evening of that day we have journeyed from the shadow
of Tol Brandir.’
‘On foot?’ cried Eomer.
´
‘Yes, even as you see us.’
Wide wonder came into Eomer’s eyes. ‘Strider is too poor a name,
´
son of Arathorn,’ he said. ‘Wingfoot I name you. This deed of the
three friends should be sung in many a hall. Forty leagues and ﬁve
you have measured ere the fourth day is ended! Hardy is the race of
Elendil!
‘But now, lord, what would you have me do! I must return in
haste to The´oden. I spoke warily before my men. It is true that we
are not yet at open war with the Black Land, and there are some,
close to the king’s ear, that speak craven counsels; but war is coming.
We shall not forsake our old alliance with Gondor, and while they
ﬁght we shall aid them: so say I and all who hold with me. The
East-mark is my charge, the ward of the Third Marshal, and I have
removed all our herds and herdfolk, withdrawing them beyond
Entwash, and leaving none here but guards and swift scouts.’
‘Then you do not pay tribute to Sauron?’ said Gimli.
´
‘We do not and we never have,’ said Eomer with a ﬂash of his
eyes; ‘though it comes to my ears that that lie has been told. Some
years ago the Lord of the Black Land wished to purchase horses of
us at great price, but we refused him, for he puts beasts to evil use.
Then he sent plundering Orcs, and they carry off what they can,
choosing always the black horses: few of these are now left. For that
reason our feud with the Orcs is bitter.
‘But at this time our chief concern is with Saruman. He has claimed
lordship over all this land, and there has been war between us for

many months. He has taken Orcs into his service, and Wolf-riders,
and evil Men, and he has closed the Gap against us, so that we are
likely to be beset both east and west.
‘It is ill dealing with such a foe: he is a wizard both cunning and
dwimmer-crafty, having many guises. He walks here and there, they
say, as an old man hooded and cloaked, very like to Gandalf, as many
now recall. His spies slip through every net, and his birds of ill omen
are abroad in the sky. I do not know how it will all end, and my
heart misgives me; for it seems to me that his friends do not all dwell
in Isengard. But if you come to the king’s house, you shall see for
yourself. Will you not come? Do I hope in vain that you have been
sent to me for a help in doubt and need?’
‘I will come when I may,’ said Aragorn.
´
‘Come now!’ said Eomer. ‘The Heir of Elendil would be a strength
indeed to the Sons of Eorl in this evil tide. There is battle even now
upon the Westemnet, and I fear that it may go ill for us.
‘Indeed in this riding north I went without the king’s leave, for in
my absence his house is left with little guard. But scouts warned me
of the orc-host coming down out of the East Wall four nights ago,
and among them they reported that some bore the white badges of
Saruman. So suspecting what I most fear, a league between Orthanc
and the Dark Tower, I led forth my e´ored, men of my own household;
and we overtook the Orcs at nightfall two days ago, near to the
borders of the Entwood. There we surrounded them, and gave battle
yesterday at dawn. Fifteen of my men I lost, and twelve horses alas!
For the Orcs were greater in number than we counted on. Others
joined them, coming out of the East across the Great River: their
trail is plain to see a little north of this spot. And others, too, came
out of the forest. Great Orcs, who also bore the White Hand of
Isengard: that kind is stronger and more fell than all others.
‘Nonetheless we put an end to them. But we have been too long
away. We are needed south and west. Will you not come? There are
spare horses as you see. There is work for the Sword to do. Yes, and
we could ﬁnd a use for Gimli’s axe and the bow of Legolas, if they
will pardon my rash words concerning the Lady of the Wood. I spoke
only as do all men in my land, and I would gladly learn better.’
‘I thank you for your fair words,’ said Aragorn, ‘and my heart
desires to come with you; but I cannot desert my friends while hope
remains.’
‘Hope does not remain,’ said Eomer. ‘You will not ﬁnd your
´
friends on the North-borders.’
‘Yet my friends are not behind. We found a clear token not far
from the East Wall that one at least of them was still alive there. But
between the wall and the downs we have found no other trace of

them, and no trail has turned aside, this way or that, unless my skill
has wholly left me.’
‘Then what do you think has become of them?’
‘I do not know. They may have been slain and burned among the
Orcs; but that you will say cannot be, and I do not fear it. I can only
think that they were carried off into the forest before the battle, even
before you encircled your foes, maybe. Can you swear that none
escaped your net in such a way?’
‘I would swear that no Orc escaped after we sighted them,’ said
Eomer. ‘We reached the forest-eaves before them, and if after that
´
any living thing broke through our ring, then it was no Orc and had
some Elvish power.’
‘Our friends were attired even as we are,’ said Aragorn; ‘and you
passed us by under the full light of day.’
‘I had forgotten that,’ said Eomer. ‘It is hard to be sure of anything
´
among so many marvels. The world is all grown strange. Elf and
Dwarf in company walk in our daily ﬁelds; and folk speak with the
Lady of the Wood and yet live; and the Sword comes back to war
that was broken in the long ages ere the fathers of our fathers rode
into the Mark! How shall a man judge what to do in such times?’
‘As he ever has judged,’ said Aragorn. ‘Good and ill have not
changed since yesteryear; nor are they one thing among Elves and
Dwarves and another among Men. It is a man’s part to discern them,
as much in the Golden Wood as in his own house.’
‘True indeed,’ said Eomer. ‘But I do not doubt you, nor the deed
´
which my heart would do. Yet I am not free to do all as I would. It
is against our law to let strangers wander at will in our land, until
the king himself shall give them leave, and more strict is the command
in these days of peril. I have begged you to come back willingly with
me, and you will not. Loth am I to begin a battle of one hundred
against three.’
‘I do not think your law was made for such a chance,’ said Aragorn.
‘Nor indeed am I a stranger; for I have been in this land before, more
than once, and ridden with the host of the Rohirrim, though under
other name and in other guise. You I have not seen before, for you
´
are young, but I have spoken with Eomund your father, and with
The´oden son of Thengel. Never in former days would any high lord
of this land have constrained a man to abandon such a quest as mine.
´
My duty at least is clear, to go on. Come now, son of Eomund, the
choice must be made at last. Aid us, or at the worst let us go free.
Or seek to carry out your law. If you do so there will be fewer to
return to your war or to your king.’
´Eomer was silent for a moment, then he spoke. ‘We both have
need of haste,’ he said. ‘My company chafes to be away, and every

hour lessens your hope. This is my choice. You may go; and what
is more, I will lend you horses. This only I ask: when your quest is
achieved, or is proved vain, return with the horses over the Entwade
to Meduseld, the high house in Edoras where The´oden now sits.
Thus you shall prove to him that I have not misjudged. In this I
place myself, and maybe my very life, in the keeping of your good
faith. Do not fail.’
‘I will not,’ said Aragorn.
There was great wonder, and many dark and doubtful glances,
´
among his men, when Eomer gave orders that the spare horses were
to be lent to the strangers; but only Eothain dared to speak openly.
´
‘It may be well enough for this lord of the race of Gondor, as he
claims,’ he said, ‘but who has heard of a horse of the Mark being
given to a Dwarf ?’
‘No one,’ said Gimli. ‘And do not trouble: no one will ever hear
of it. I would sooner walk than sit on the back of any beast so great,
free or begrudged.’
‘But you must ride now, or you will hinder us,’ said Aragorn.
‘Come, you shall sit behind me, friend Gimli,’ said Legolas. ‘Then
all will be well, and you need neither borrow a horse nor be troubled
by one.’
A great dark-grey horse was brought to Aragorn, and he mounted
´
it. ‘Hasufel is his name,’ said Eomer. ‘May he bear you well and to
better fortune than Ga´rulf, his late master!’
A smaller and lighter horse, but restive and ﬁery, was brought to
Legolas. Arod was his name. But Legolas asked them to take off
saddle and rein. ‘I need them not,’ he said, and leaped lightly up,
and to their wonder Arod was tame and willing beneath him, moving
here and there with but a spoken word: such was the Elvish way with
all good beasts. Gimli was lifted up behind his friend, and he clung
to him, not much more at ease than Sam Gamgee in a boat.
´
‘Farewell, and may you ﬁnd what you seek!’ cried Eomer. ‘Return
with what speed you may, and let our swords hereafter shine
together!’
‘I will come,’ said Aragorn.
‘And I will come, too,’ said Gimli. ‘The matter of the Lady Galadriel
lies still between us. I have yet to teach you gentle speech.’
´
‘We shall see,’ said Eomer. ‘So many strange things have chanced
that to learn the praise of a fair lady under the loving strokes of a
Dwarf ’s axe will seem no great wonder. Farewell!’
With that they parted. Very swift were the horses of Rohan. When
after a little Gimli looked back, the company of Eomer were already
´

small and far away. Aragorn did not look back: he was watching the
trail as they sped on their way, bending low with his head beside the
neck of Hasufel. Before long they came to the borders of the Entwash,
´
and there they met the other trail of which Eomer had spoken, coming
down from the East out of the Wold.
Aragorn dismounted and surveyed the ground, then leaping back
into the saddle, he rode away for some distance eastward, keeping
to one side and taking care not to override the footprints. Then he
again dismounted and examined the ground, going backwards and
forwards on foot.
‘There is little to discover,’ he said when he returned. ‘The main
trail is all confused with the passage of the horsemen as they came
back; their outward course must have lain nearer the river. But this
eastward trail is fresh and clear. There is no sign there of any feet
going the other way, back towards Anduin. Now we must ride slower,
and make sure that no trace or footstep branches off on either side.
The Orcs must have been aware from this point that they were pur-
sued; they may have made some attempt to get their captives away
before they were overtaken.’
As they rode forward the day was overcast. Low grey clouds came
over the Wold. A mist shrouded the sun. Ever nearer the tree-clad
slopes of Fangorn loomed, slowly darkling as the sun went west.
They saw no sign of any trail to right or left, but here and there they
passed single Orcs, fallen in their tracks as they ran, with grey-
feathered arrows sticking in back or throat.
At last as the afternoon was waning they came to the eaves of the
forest, and in an open glade among the ﬁrst trees they found the
place of the great burning: the ashes were still hot and smoking.
Beside it was a great pile of helms and mail, cloven shields, and
broken swords, bows and darts and other gear of war. Upon a stake
in the middle was set a great goblin head; upon its shattered helm
the white badge could still be seen. Further away, not far from the
river, where it came streaming out from the edge of the wood, there
was a mound. It was newly raised: the raw earth was covered with
fresh-cut turves: about it were planted ﬁfteen spears.
Aragorn and his companions searched far and wide about the
ﬁeld of battle, but the light faded, and evening soon drew down, dim
and misty. By nightfall they had discovered no trace of Merry and
Pippin.
‘We can do no more,’ said Gimli sadly. ‘We have been set many
riddles since we came to Tol Brandir, but this is the hardest to
unravel. I would guess that the burned bones of the hobbits are now
mingled with the Orcs’. It will be hard news for Frodo, if he lives to

hear it; and hard too for the old hobbit who waits in Rivendell. Elrond
was against their coming.’
‘But Gandalf was not,’ said Legolas.
‘But Gandalf chose to come himself, and he was the ﬁrst to be
lost,’ answered Gimli. ‘His foresight failed him.’
‘The counsel of Gandalf was not founded on foreknowledge of
safety, for himself or for others,’ said Aragorn. ‘There are some things
that it is better to begin than to refuse, even though the end may be
dark. But I shall not depart from this place yet. In any case we must
here await the morning-light.’
A little way beyond the battle-ﬁeld they made their camp under
a spreading tree: it looked like a chestnut, and yet it still bore many
broad brown leaves of a former year, like dry hands with long splayed
ﬁngers; they rattled mournfully in the night-breeze.
Gimli shivered. They had brought only one blanket apiece. ‘Let
us light a ﬁre,’ he said. ‘I care no longer for the danger. Let the Orcs
come as thick as summer-moths round a candle!’
‘If those unhappy hobbits are astray in the woods, it might draw
them hither,’ said Legolas.
‘And it might draw other things, neither Orc nor Hobbit,’ said
Aragorn. ‘We are near to the mountain-marches of the traitor
Saruman. Also we are on the very edge of Fangorn, and it is perilous
to touch the trees of that wood, it is said.’
‘But the Rohirrim made a great burning here yesterday,’ said
Gimli, ‘and they felled trees for the ﬁre, as can be seen. Yet they
passed the night after safely here, when their labour was ended.’
‘They were many,’ said Aragorn, ‘and they do not heed the wrath
of Fangorn, for they come here seldom, and they do not go under
the trees. But our paths are likely to lead us into the very forest itself.
So have a care! Cut no living wood!’
‘There is no need,’ said Gimli. ‘The Riders have left chip and
bough enough, and there is dead wood lying in plenty.’ He went off
to gather fuel, and busied himself with building and kindling a ﬁre;
but Aragorn sat silent with his back to the great tree, deep in thought;
and Legolas stood alone in the open, looking towards the profound
shadow of the wood, leaning forward, as one who listens to voices
calling from a distance.
When the Dwarf had a small bright blaze going, the three com-
panions drew close to it and sat together, shrouding the light with
their hooded forms. Legolas looked up at the boughs of the tree
reaching out above them.
‘Look!’ he said. ‘The tree is glad of the ﬁre!’
It may have been that the dancing shadows tricked their eyes, but

certainly to each of the companions the boughs appeared to be bend-
ing this way and that so as to come above the ﬂames, while the upper
branches were stooping down; the brown leaves now stood out stiff,
and rubbed together like many cold cracked hands taking comfort in
the warmth.
There was a silence, for suddenly the dark and unknown forest,
so near at hand, made itself felt as a great brooding presence, full of
secret purpose. After a while Legolas spoke again.
‘Celeborn warned us not to go far into Fangorn,’ he said. ‘Do you
know why, Aragorn? What are the fables of the forest that Boromir
had heard?’
‘I have heard many tales in Gondor and elsewhere,’ said Aragorn,
‘but if it were not for the words of Celeborn I should deem them
only fables that Men have made as true knowledge fades. I had
thought of asking you what was the truth of the matter. And if an
Elf of the wood does not know, how shall a Man answer?’
‘You have journeyed further than I,’ said Legolas. ‘I have heard
nothing of this in my own land, save only songs that tell how the
Onodrim, that Men call Ents, dwelt there long ago; for Fangorn is
old, old even as the Elves would reckon it.’
‘Yes, it is old,’ said Aragorn, ‘as old as the forest by the Barrow-
downs, and it is far greater. Elrond says that the two are akin, the
last strongholds of the mighty woods of the Elder Days, in which the
Firstborn roamed while Men still slept. Yet Fangorn holds some
secret of its own. What it is I do not know.’
‘And I do not wish to know,’ said Gimli. ‘Let nothing that dwells
in Fangorn be troubled on my account!’
They now drew lots for the watches, and the lot for the ﬁrst watch
fell to Gimli. The others lay down. Almost at once sleep laid hold
on them. ‘Gimli!’ said Aragorn drowsily. ‘Remember, it is perilous
to cut bough or twig from a living tree in Fangorn. But do not stray
far in search of dead wood. Let the ﬁre die rather! Call me at need!’
With that he fell asleep. Legolas already lay motionless, his fair
hands folded upon his breast, his eyes unclosed, blending living night
and deep dream, as is the way with Elves. Gimli sat hunched by the
ﬁre, running his thumb thoughtfully along the edge of his axe. The
tree rustled. There was no other sound.
Suddenly Gimli looked up, and there just on the edge of the
ﬁrelight stood an old bent man, leaning on a staff, and wrapped in
a great cloak; his wide-brimmed hat was pulled down over his eyes.
Gimli sprang up, too amazed for the moment to cry out, though at
once the thought ﬂashed into his mind that Saruman had caught
them. Both Aragorn and Legolas, roused by his sudden movement,
sat up and stared. The old man did not speak or make a sign.

‘Well, father, what can we do for you?’ said Aragorn, leaping to
his feet. ‘Come and be warm, if you are cold!’ He strode forward,
but the old man was gone. There was no trace of him to be found
near at hand, and they did not dare to wander far. The moon had
set and the night was very dark.
Suddenly Legolas gave a cry. ‘The horses! The horses!’
The horses were gone. They had dragged their pickets and dis-
appeared. For some time the three companions stood still and silent,
troubled by this new stroke of ill fortune. They were under the eaves
of Fangorn, and endless leagues lay between them and the Men of
Rohan, their only friends in this wide and dangerous land. As they
stood, it seemed to them that they heard, far off in the night, the
sound of horses whinnying and neighing. Then all was quiet again,
except for the cold rustle of the wind.
‘Well, they are gone,’ said Aragorn at last. ‘We cannot ﬁnd them
or catch them; so that if they do not return of their own will, we
must do without. We started on our feet, and we have those still.’
‘Feet!’ said Gimli. ‘But we cannot eat them as well as walk on
them.’ He threw some fuel on the ﬁre and slumped down beside it.
‘Only a few hours ago you were unwilling to sit on a horse of
Rohan,’ laughed Legolas. ‘You will make a rider yet.’
‘It seems unlikely that I shall have the chance,’ said Gimli.
‘If you wish to know what I think,’ he began again after a while,
‘I think it was Saruman. Who else? Remember the words of Eomer:
´
he walks about like an old man hooded and cloaked. Those were the
words. He has gone off with our horses, or scared them away, and
here we are. There is more trouble coming to us, mark my words!’
‘I mark them,’ said Aragorn. ‘But I marked also that this old man
had a hat not a hood. Still I do not doubt that you guess right, and
that we are in peril here, by night or day. Yet in the meantime there
is nothing that we can do but rest, while we may. I will watch for a
while now, Gimli. I have more need of thought than of sleep.’
The night passed slowly. Legolas followed Aragorn, and Gimli
followed Legolas, and their watches wore away. But nothing hap-
pened. The old man did not appear again, and the horses did not
return.

Chapter 3
T H E  U R U K - H A I
Pippin lay in a dark and troubled dream: it seemed that he could
hear his own small voice echoing in black tunnels, calling Frodo,
Frodo! But instead of Frodo hundreds of hideous orc-faces grinned
at him out of the shadows, hundreds of hideous arms grasped at him
from every side. Where was Merry?
He woke. Cold air blew on his face. He was lying on his back.
Evening was coming and the sky above was growing dim. He turned
and found that the dream was little worse than the waking. His
wrists, legs, and ankles were tied with cords. Beside him Merry lay,
white-faced, with a dirty rag bound across his brows. All about them
sat or stood a great company of Orcs.
Slowly in Pippin’s aching head memory pieced itself together and
became separated from dream-shadows. Of course: he and Merry
had run off into the woods. What had come over them? Why had
they dashed off like that, taking no notice of old Strider? They had
run a long way shouting – he could not remember how far or how
long; and then suddenly they had crashed right into a group of Orcs:
they were standing listening, and they did not appear to see Merry
and Pippin until they were almost in their arms. Then they yelled
and dozens of other goblins had sprung out of the trees. Merry and
he had drawn their swords, but the Orcs did not wish to ﬁght, and
had tried only to lay hold of them, even when Merry had cut off
several of their arms and hands. Good old Merry!
Then Boromir had come leaping through the trees. He had made
them ﬁght. He slew many of them and the rest ﬂed. But they had
not gone far on the way back when they were attacked again, by a
hundred Orcs at least, some of them very large, and they shot a rain
of arrows: always at Boromir. Boromir had blown his great horn till
the woods rang, and at ﬁrst the Orcs had been dismayed and had
drawn back; but when no answer but the echoes came, they had
attacked more ﬁercely than ever. Pippin did not remember much
more. His last memory was of Boromir leaning against a tree, plucking
out an arrow; then darkness fell suddenly.
‘I suppose I was knocked on the head,’ he said to himself. ‘I
wonder if poor Merry is much hurt. What has happened to Boromir?
Why didn’t the Orcs kill us? Where are we, and where are we going?’
He could not answer the questions. He felt cold and sick. ‘I wish
Gandalf had never persuaded Elrond to let us come,’ he thought.

‘What good have I been? Just a nuisance: a passenger, a piece of
luggage. And now I have been stolen and I am just a piece of luggage
for the Orcs. I hope Strider or someone will come and claim us! But
ought I to hope for it? Won’t that throw out all the plans? I wish I
could get free!’
He struggled a little, quite uselessly. One of the Orcs sitting near
laughed and said something to a companion in their abominable
tongue. ‘Rest while you can, little fool!’ he said then to Pippin, in
the Common Speech, which he made almost as hideous as his own
language. ‘Rest while you can! We’ll ﬁnd a use for your legs before
long. You’ll wish you had got none before we get home.’
‘If I had my way, you’d wish you were dead now,’ said the other.
‘I’d make you squeak, you miserable rat.’ He stooped over Pippin,
bringing his yellow fangs close to his face. He had a black knife with
a long jagged blade in his hand. ‘Lie quiet, or I’ll tickle you with
this,’ he hissed. ‘Don’t draw attention to yourself, or I may forget
my orders. Curse the Isengarders! Uglu´k u bagronk sha pushdug
Saruman-glob bu´bhosh skai’: he passed into a long angry speech in his
own tongue that slowly died away into muttering and snarling.
Terriﬁed Pippin lay still, though the pain at his wrists and ankles
was growing, and the stones beneath him were boring into his
back. To take his mind off himself he listened intently to all that
he could hear. There were many voices round about, and though
orc-speech sounded at all times full of hate and anger, it seemed
plain that something like a quarrel had begun, and was getting
hotter.
To Pippin’s surprise he found that much of the talk was intelligible;
many of the Orcs were using ordinary language. Apparently the
members of two or three quite different tribes were present, and they
could not understand one another’s orc-speech. There was an angry
debate concerning what they were to do now: which way they were
to take and what should be done with the prisoners.
‘There’s no time to kill them properly,’ said one. ‘No time for
play on this trip.’
‘That can’t be helped,’ said another. ‘But why not kill them quick,
kill them now? They’re a cursed nuisance, and we’re in a hurry.
Evening’s coming on, and we ought to get a move on.’
‘Orders,’ said a third voice in a deep growl. ‘Kill all but not the
Halﬂings; they are to be brought back alive as quickly as possible. That’s
my orders.’
‘What are they wanted for?’ asked several voices. ‘Why alive? Do
they give good sport?’
‘No! I heard that one of them has got something, something that’s

wanted for the War, some Elvish plot or other. Anyway they’ll both
be questioned.’
‘Is that all you know? Why don’t we search them and ﬁnd out?
We might ﬁnd something that we could use ourselves.’
‘That is a very interesting remark,’ sneered a voice, softer than the
others but more evil. ‘I may have to report that. The prisoners are
not to be searched or plundered: those are my orders.’
‘And mine too,’ said the deep voice. ‘Alive and as captured; no
spoiling. That’s my orders.’
‘Not our orders!’ said one of the earlier voices. ‘We have come all
the way from the Mines to kill, and avenge our folk. I wish to kill,
and then go back north.’
‘Then you can wish again,’ said the growling voice. ‘I am Uglu´k.
I command. I return to Isengard by the shortest road.’
‘Is Saruman the master or the Great Eye?’ said the evil voice. ‘We
should go back at once to Lugbu´rz.’
‘If we could cross the Great River, we might,’ said another voice.
‘But there are not enough of us to venture down to the bridges.’
‘I came across,’ said the evil voice. ‘A winged Nazguˆl awaits us
northward on the east-bank.’
‘Maybe, maybe! Then you’ll ﬂy off with our prisoners, and get all
the pay and praise in Lugbu´ rz, and leave us to foot it as best we can
through the Horse-country. No, we must stick together. These lands
are dangerous: full of foul rebels and brigands.’
‘Aye, we must stick together,’ growled Uglu´k. ‘I don’t trust you
little swine. You’ve no guts outside your own sties. But for us you’d
all have run away. We are the ﬁghting Uruk-hai! We slew the great
warrior. We took the prisoners. We are the servants of Saruman the
Wise, the White Hand: the Hand that gives us man’s-ﬂesh to eat.
We came out of Isengard, and led you here, and we shall lead you
back by the way we choose. I am Uglu´k. I have spoken.’
‘You have spoken more than enough, Uglu´k,’ sneered the evil
voice. ‘I wonder how they would like it in Lugbu´rz. They might think
that Uglu´k’s shoulders needed relieving of a swollen head. They
might ask where his strange ideas came from. Did they come from
Saruman, perhaps? Who does he think he is, setting up on his own
with his ﬁlthy white badges? They might agree with me, with Grish-
na´kh their trusted messenger; and I Grishna´kh say this: Saruman is
a fool, and a dirty treacherous fool. But the Great Eye is on him.
‘Swine is it? How do you folk like being called swine by the muck-
rakers of a dirty little wizard? It’s orc-ﬂesh they eat, I’ll warrant.’
Many loud yells in orc-speech answered him, and the ringing clash
of weapons being drawn. Cautiously Pippin rolled over, hoping to
see what would happen. His guards had gone to join in the fray. In

the twilight he saw a large black Orc, probably Uglu´k, standing facing
Grishna´kh, a short crook-legged creature, very broad and with long
arms that hung almost to the ground. Round them were many smaller
goblins. Pippin supposed that these were the ones from the North.
They had drawn their knives and swords, but hesitated to attack
Uglu´k.
Uglu´ k shouted, and a number of other Orcs of nearly his own size
ran up. Then suddenly, without warning, Uglu´ k sprang forwards,
and with two swift strokes swept the heads off two of his opponents.
Grishna´kh stepped aside and vanished into the shadows. The others
gave way, and one stepped backwards and fell over Merry’s prostrate
form with a curse. Yet that probably saved his life, for Uglu´ k’s fol-
lowers leaped over him and cut down another with their broad-bladed
swords. It was the yellow-fanged guard. His body fell right on top of
Pippin, still clutching its long saw-edged knife.
‘Put up your weapons!’ shouted Uglu´k. ‘And let’s have no more
nonsense! We go straight west from here, and down the stair. From
there straight to the downs, then along the river to the forest. And
we march day and night. That clear?’
‘Now,’ thought Pippin, ‘if only it takes that ugly fellow a little
while to get his troop under control, I’ve got a chance.’ A gleam of
hope had come to him. The edge of the black knife had snicked his
arm, and then slid down to his wrist. He felt the blood trickling
on to his hand, but he also felt the cold touch of steel against his
skin.
The Orcs were getting ready to march again, but some of the
Northerners were still unwilling, and the Isengarders slew two more
before the rest were cowed. There was much cursing and confusion.
For the moment Pippin was unwatched. His legs were securely
bound, but his arms were only tied about the wrists, and his hands
were in front of him. He could move them both together, though the
bonds were cruelly tight. He pushed the dead Orc to one side, then
hardly daring to breathe, he drew the knot of the wrist-cord up and
down against the blade of the knife. It was sharp and the dead hand
held it fast. The cord was cut! Quickly Pippin took it in his ﬁngers
and knotted it again into a loose bracelet of two loops and slipped it
over his hands. Then he lay very still.
‘Pick up those prisoners!’ shouted Uglu´k. ‘Don’t play any tricks
with them! If they are not alive when we get back, someone else will
die too.’
An Orc seized Pippin like a sack, put its head between his tied
hands, grabbed his arms and dragged them down, until Pippin’s face
was crushed against its neck; then it jolted off with him. Another

treated Merry in the same way. The Orc’s clawlike hand gripped
Pippin’s arms like iron; the nails bit into him. He shut his eyes and
slipped back into evil dreams.
Suddenly he was thrown on to the stony ﬂoor again. It was early
night, but the slim moon was already falling westward. They were
on the edge of a cliff that seemed to look out over a sea of pale mist.
There was a sound of water falling nearby.
‘The scouts have come back at last,’ said an Orc close at hand.
‘Well, what did you discover?’ growled the voice of Uglu´ k.
‘Only a single horseman, and he made off westwards. All’s clear
now.’
‘Now, I daresay. But how long? You fools! You should have shot
him. He’ll raise the alarm. The cursed horsebreeders will hear of us
by morning. Now we’ll have to leg it double quick.’
A shadow bent over Pippin. It was Uglu´ k. ‘Sit up!’ said the Orc.
‘My lads are tired of lugging you about. We have got to climb down,
and you must use your legs. Be helpful now. No crying out, no trying
to escape. We have ways of paying for tricks that you won’t like,
though they won’t spoil your usefulness for the Master.’
He cut the thongs round Pippin’s legs and ankles, picked him up
by his hair and stood him on his feet. Pippin fell down, and Uglu´k
dragged him up by his hair again. Several Orcs laughed. Uglu´ k thrust
a ﬂask between his teeth and poured some burning liquid down his
throat: he felt a hot ﬁerce glow ﬂow through him. The pain in his
legs and ankles vanished. He could stand.
‘Now for the other!’ said Uglu´k. Pippin saw him go to Merry, who
was lying close by, and kick him. Merry groaned. Seizing him roughly
Uglu´k pulled him into a sitting position, and tore the bandage off
his head. Then he smeared the wound with some dark stuff out of
a small wooden box. Merry cried out and struggled wildly.
The Orcs clapped and hooted. ‘Can’t take his medicine,’ they
jeered. ‘Doesn’t know what’s good for him. Ai! We shall have some
fun later.’
But at the moment Uglu´k was not engaged in sport. He needed
speed and had to humour unwilling followers. He was healing Merry
in orc-fashion; and his treatment worked swiftly. When he had forced
a drink from his ﬂask down the hobbit’s throat, cut his leg-bonds,
and dragged him to his feet, Merry stood up, looking pale but grim
and deﬁant, and very much alive. The gash in his forehead gave
him no more trouble, but he bore a brown scar to the end of his
days.
‘Hullo, Pippin!’ he said. ‘So you’ve come on this little expedition,
too? Where do we get bed and breakfast?’
‘Now then!’ said Uglu´k. ‘None of that! Hold your tongues. No

talk to one another. Any trouble will be reported at the other end,
and He’ll know how to pay you. You’ll get bed and breakfast all
right: more than you can stomach.’
The orc-band began to descend a narrow ravine leading down into
the misty plain below. Merry and Pippin, separated by a dozen Orcs
or more, climbed down with them. At the bottom they stepped on
to grass, and the hearts of the hobbits rose.
‘Now straight on!’ shouted Uglu´k. ‘West and a little north. Follow
Lugdush.’
‘But what are we going to do at sunrise?’ said some of the North-
erners.
‘Go on running,’ said Uglu´k. ‘What do you think? Sit on the grass
and wait for the Whiteskins to join the picnic?’
‘But we can’t run in the sunlight.’
‘You’ll run with me behind you,’ said Uglu´k. ‘Run! Or you’ll never
see your beloved holes again. By the White Hand! What’s the use of
sending out mountain-maggots on a trip, only half trained. Run,
curse you! Run while night lasts!’
Then the whole company began to run with the long loping strides
of Orcs. They kept no order, thrusting, jostling, and cursing; yet their
speed was very great. Each hobbit had a guard of three. Pippin was
far back in the line. He wondered how long he would be able to go
on at this pace: he had had no food since the morning. One of his
guards had a whip. But at present the orc-liquor was still hot in him.
His wits, too, were wide-awake.
Every now and again there came into his mind unbidden a vision
of the keen face of Strider bending over a dark trail, and running,
running behind. But what could even a Ranger see except a confused
trail of orc-feet? His own little prints and Merry’s were overwhelmed
by the trampling of the iron-shod shoes before them and behind them
and about them.
They had gone only a mile or so from the cliff when the land
sloped down into a wide shallow depression, where the ground was
soft and wet. Mist lay there, pale-glimmering in the last rays of the
sickle moon. The dark shapes of the Orcs in front grew dim, and
then were swallowed up.
‘Ai! Steady now!’ shouted Uglu´k from the rear.
A sudden thought leaped into Pippin’s mind, and he acted on it
at once. He swerved aside to the right, and dived out of the reach of
his clutching guard, headﬁrst into the mist; he landed sprawling on
the grass.
‘Halt!’ yelled Uglu´ k.
There was for a moment turmoil and confusion. Pippin sprang up

and ran. But the Orcs were after him. Some suddenly loomed up
right in front of him.
‘No hope of escape!’ thought Pippin. ‘But there is a hope that I
have left some of my own marks unspoilt on the wet ground.’ He
groped with his two tied hands at his throat, and unclasped the
brooch of his cloak. Just as long arms and hard claws seized him, he
let it fall. ‘There I suppose it will lie until the end of time,’ he thought.
‘I don’t know why I did it. If the others have escaped, they’ve probably
all gone with Frodo.’
A whip-thong curled round his legs, and he stiﬂed a cry.
‘Enough!’ shouted Uglu´k running up. ‘He’s still got to run a long
way yet. Make ’em both run! Just use the whip as a reminder.’
‘But that’s not all,’ he snarled, turning to Pippin. ‘I shan’t forget.
Payment is only put off. Leg it!’
Neither Pippin nor Merry remembered much of the later part of
the journey. Evil dreams and evil waking were blended into a long
tunnel of misery, with hope growing ever fainter behind. They ran,
and they ran, striving to keep up the pace set by the Orcs, licked
every now and again with a cruel thong cunningly handled. If they
halted or stumbled, they were seized and dragged for some distance.
The warmth of the orc-draught had gone. Pippin felt cold and
sick again. Suddenly he fell face downward on the turf. Hard hands
with rending nails gripped and lifted him. He was carried like a sack
once more, and darkness grew about him: whether the darkness of
another night, or a blindness of his eyes, he could not tell.
Dimly he became aware of voices clamouring: it seemed that many
of the Orcs were demanding a halt. Uglu´k was shouting. He felt
himself ﬂung to the ground, and he lay as he fell, till black dreams
took him. But he did not long escape from pain; soon the iron grip
of merciless hands was on him again. For a long time he was tossed
and shaken, and then slowly the darkness gave way, and he came
back to the waking world and found that it was morning. Orders
were shouted and he was thrown roughly on the grass.
There he lay for a while, ﬁghting with despair. His head swam, but
from the heat in his body he guessed that he had been given another
draught. An Orc stooped over him, and ﬂung him some bread and a
strip of raw dried ﬂesh. He ate the stale grey bread hungrily, but not
the meat. He was famished but not yet so famished as to eat ﬂesh ﬂung
to him by an Orc, the ﬂesh of he dared not guess what creature.
He sat up and looked about. Merry was not far away. They were
by the banks of a swift narrow river. Ahead mountains loomed: a tall
peak was catching the ﬁrst rays of the sun. A dark smudge of forest
lay on the lower slopes before them.

There was much shouting and debating among the Orcs; a quarrel
seemed on the point of breaking out again between the Northerners
and the Isengarders. Some were pointing back away south, and some
were pointing eastward.
‘Very well,’ said Uglu´k. ‘Leave them to me then! No killing, as
I’ve told you before; but if you want to throw away what we’ve come
all the way to get, throw it away! I’ll look after it. Let the ﬁghting
Uruk-hai do the work, as usual. If you’re afraid of the Whiteskins,
run! Run! There’s the forest,’ he shouted, pointing ahead. ‘Get to it!
It’s your best hope. Off you go! And quick, before I knock a few
more heads off, to put some sense into the others.’
There was some cursing and scufﬂing, and then most of the North-
erners broke away and dashed off, over a hundred of them, running
wildly along the river towards the mountains. The hobbits were left
with the Isengarders: a grim dark band, four score at least of large,
swart, slant-eyed Orcs with great bows and short broad-bladed
swords. A few of the larger and bolder Northerners remained with
them.
‘Now we’ll deal with Grishna´kh,’ said Uglu´k; but some even of
his own followers were looking uneasily southwards.
‘I know,’ growled Uglu´k. ‘The cursed horse-boys have got wind
of us. But that’s all your fault, Snaga. You and the other scouts ought
to have your ears cut off. But we are the ﬁghters. We’ll feast on
horseﬂesh yet, or something better.’
At that moment Pippin saw why some of the troop had been
pointing eastward. From that direction there now came hoarse cries,
and there was Grishna´kh again, and at his back a couple of score of
others like him: long-armed crook-legged Orcs. They had a red eye
painted on their shields. Uglu´k stepped forward to meet them.
‘So you’ve come back?’ he said. ‘Thought better of it, eh?’
‘I’ve returned to see that Orders are carried out and the prisoners
safe,’ answered Grishna´kh.
‘Indeed!’ said Uglu´k. ‘Waste of effort. I’ll see that orders are carried
out in my command. And what else did you come back for? You
went in a hurry. Did you leave anything behind?’
‘I left a fool,’ snarled Grishna´kh. ‘But there were some stout fellows
with him that are too good to lose. I knew you’d lead them into a
mess. I’ve come to help them.’
‘Splendid!’ laughed Uglu´k. ‘But unless you’ve got some guts for
ﬁghting, you’ve taken the wrong way. Lugbu´rz was your road. The
Whiteskins are coming. What’s happened to your precious Nazguˆl?
Has he had another mount shot under him? Now, if you’d brought
him along, that might have been useful – if these Nazguˆ l are all they
make out.’

‘Nazguˆl, Nazguˆl,’ said Grishna´kh, shivering and licking his lips, as
if the word had a foul taste that he savoured painfully. ‘You speak
of what is deep beyond the reach of your muddy dreams, Uglu´k,’
he said. ‘Nazguˆl! Ah! All that they make out! One day you’ll wish
that you had not said that. Ape!’ he snarled ﬁercely. ‘You ought
to know that they’re the apple of the Great Eye. But the winged
Nazguˆl: not yet, not yet. He won’t let them show themselves across
the Great River yet, not too soon. They’re for the War – and other
purposes.’
‘You seem to know a lot,’ said Uglu´k. ‘More than is good for you,
I guess. Perhaps those in Lugbu´rz might wonder how, and why. But
in the meantime the Uruk-hai of Isengard can do the dirty work, as
usual. Don’t stand slavering there! Get your rabble together! The
other swine are legging it to the forest. You’d better follow. You
wouldn’t get back to the Great River alive. Right off the mark! Now!
I’ll be on your heels.’
The Isengarders seized Merry and Pippin again and slung them
on their backs. Then the troop started off. Hour after hour they ran,
pausing now and again only to sling the hobbits to fresh carriers.
Either because they were quicker and hardier, or because of some
plan of Grishna´kh’s, the Isengarders gradually passed through the
Orcs of Mordor, and Grishna´kh’s folk closed in behind. Soon they
were gaining also on the Northerners ahead. The forest began to
draw nearer.
Pippin was bruised and torn, his aching head was grated by the
ﬁlthy jowl and hairy ear of the Orc that held him. Immediately in
front were bowed backs, and tough thick legs going up and down,
up and down, unresting, as if they were made of wire and horn,
beating out the nightmare seconds of an endless time.
In the afternoon Uglu´k’s troop overtook the Northerners. They
were ﬂagging in the rays of the bright sun, winter sun shining in a
pale cool sky though it was; their heads were down and their tongues
lolling out.
‘Maggots!’ jeered the Isengarders. ‘You’re cooked. The Whiteskins
will catch you and eat you. They’re coming!’
A cry from Grishna´kh showed that this was not mere jest. Horse-
men, riding very swiftly, had indeed been sighted: still far behind but
gaining on the Orcs, gaining on them like a tide over the ﬂats on folk
straying in a quicksand.
The Isengarders began to run with a redoubled pace that aston-
ished Pippin, a terriﬁc spurt it seemed for the end of a race. Then
he saw that the sun was sinking, falling behind the Misty Mountains;
shadows reached over the land. The soldiers of Mordor lifted their

heads and also began to put on speed. The forest was dark and close.
Already they had passed a few outlying trees. The land was beginning
to slope upwards, ever more steeply; but the Orcs did not halt. Both
Uglu´k and Grishna´kh shouted, spurring them on to a last effort.
‘They will make it yet. They will escape,’ thought Pippin. And
then he managed to twist his neck, so as to glance back with one eye
over his shoulder. He saw that riders away eastward were already
level with the Orcs, galloping over the plain. The sunset gilded their
spears and helmets, and glinted in their pale ﬂowing hair. They were
hemming the Orcs in, preventing them from scattering, and driving
them along the line of the river.
He wondered very much what kind of folk they were. He wished
now that he had learned more in Rivendell, and looked more at maps
and things; but in those days the plans for the journey seemed to be
in more competent hands, and he had never reckoned with being cut
off from Gandalf, or from Strider, and even from Frodo. All that he
could remember about Rohan was that Gandalf ’s horse, Shadowfax,
had come from that land. That sounded hopeful, as far as it went.
‘But how will they know that we are not Orcs?’ he thought. ‘I
don’t suppose they’ve ever heard of hobbits down here. I suppose I
ought to be glad that the beastly Orcs look like being destroyed, but
I would rather be saved myself.’ The chances were that he and Merry
would be killed together with their captors, before ever the Men of
Rohan were aware of them.
A few of the riders appeared to be bowmen, skilled at shooting
from a running horse. Riding swiftly into range they shot arrows at
the Orcs that straggled behind, and several of them fell; then the
riders wheeled away out of the range of the answering bows of their
enemies, who shot wildly, not daring to halt. This happened many
times, and on one occasion arrows fell among the Isengarders. One
of them, just in front of Pippin, stumbled and did not get up again.
Night came down without the Riders closing in for battle. Many
Orcs had fallen, but fully two hundred remained. In the early darkness
the Orcs came to a hillock. The eaves of the forest were very near, prob-
ably no more than three furlongs away, but they could go no further.
The horsemen had encircled them. A small band disobeyed Uglu´k’s
command, and ran on towards the forest: only three returned.
‘Well, here we are,’ sneered Grishna´kh. ‘Fine leadership! I hope
the great Uglu´k will lead us out again.’
‘Put those Halﬂings down!’ ordered Uglu´k, taking no notice of
Grishna´kh. ‘You, Lugdush, get two others and stand guard over
them! They’re not to be killed, unless the ﬁlthy Whiteskins break

through. Understand? As long as I’m alive, I want ’em. But they’re
not to cry out, and they’re not to be rescued. Bind their legs!’
The last part of the order was carried out mercilessly. But Pippin
found that for the ﬁrst time he was close to Merry. The Orcs were
making a great deal of noise, shouting and clashing their weapons,
and the hobbits managed to whisper together for a while.
‘I don’t think much of this,’ said Merry. ‘I feel nearly done in.
Don’t think I could crawl away far, even if I was free.’
‘Lembas!’ whispered Pippin. ‘Lembas: I’ve got some. Have you? I
don’t think they’ve taken anything but our swords.’
‘Yes, I had a packet in my pocket,’ answered Merry, ‘but it must
be battered to crumbs. Anyway I can’t put my mouth in my pocket!’
‘You won’t have to. I’ve——’; but just then a savage kick warned
Pippin that the noise had died down, and the guards were watchful.
The night was cold and still. All round the knoll on which the
Orcs were gathered little watch-ﬁres sprang up, golden-red in the
darkness, a complete ring of them. They were within a long bowshot,
but the riders did not show themselves against the light, and the Orcs
wasted many arrows shooting at the ﬁres, until Uglu´k stopped them.
The riders made no sound. Later in the night when the moon came
out of the mist, then occasionally they could be seen, shadowy shapes
that glinted now and again in the white light, as they moved in
ceaseless patrol.
‘They’ll wait for the Sun, curse them!’ growled one of the guards.
‘Why don’t we get together and charge through? What’s old Uglu´k
think he’s doing, I should like to know?’
‘I daresay you would,’ snarled Uglu´k stepping up from behind.
‘Meaning I don’t think at all, eh? Curse you! You’re as bad as the
other rabble: the maggots and the apes of Lugbu´rz. No good trying
to charge with them. They’d just squeal and bolt, and there are more
than enough of these ﬁlthy horse-boys to mop up our lot on the
ﬂat.
‘There’s only one thing those maggots can do: they can see like
gimlets in the dark. But these Whiteskins have better night-eyes than
most Men, from all I’ve heard; and don’t forget their horses! They
can see the night-breeze, or so it’s said. Still there’s one thing the
ﬁne fellows don’t know: Mauhu´r and his lads are in the forest, and
they should turn up any time now.’
Uglu´ k’s words were enough, apparently, to satisfy the Isengarders;
but the other Orcs were both dispirited and rebellious. They posted
a few watchers, but most of them lay on the ground, resting in the
pleasant darkness. It did indeed become very dark again; for the
moon passed westward into thick cloud, and Pippin could not see

anything a few feet away. The ﬁres brought no light to the hillock.
The riders were not, however, content merely to wait for the dawn
and let their enemies rest. A sudden outcry on the east side of the
knoll showed that something was wrong. It seemed that some of the
Men had ridden in close, slipped off their horses, crawled to the edge
of the camp and killed several Orcs, and then had faded away again.
Uglu´k dashed off to stop a stampede.
Pippin and Merry sat up. Their guards, Isengarders, had gone
with Uglu´ k. But if the hobbits had any thought of escape, it was soon
dashed. A long hairy arm took each of them by the neck and drew
them close together. Dimly they were aware of Grishna´kh’s great
head and hideous face between them; his foul breath was on their
cheeks. He began to paw them and feel them. Pippin shuddered as
hard cold ﬁngers groped down his back.
‘Well, my little ones!’ said Grishna´kh in a soft whisper. ‘Enjoying
your nice rest? Or not? A little awkwardly placed perhaps: swords
and whips on one side, and nasty spears on the other! Little people
should not meddle in affairs that are too big for them.’ His ﬁngers
continued to grope. There was a light like a pale but hot ﬁre behind
his eyes.
The thought came suddenly into Pippin’s mind, as if caught direct
from the urgent thought of his enemy: ‘Grishna´kh knows about the
Ring! He’s looking for it, while Uglu´k is busy: he probably wants it
for himself.’ Cold fear was in Pippin’s heart, yet at the same time he
was wondering what use he could make of Grishna´kh’s desire.
‘I don’t think you will ﬁnd it that way,’ he whispered. ‘It isn’t easy
to ﬁnd.’
‘Find it?’ said Grishna´kh: his ﬁngers stopped crawling and gripped
Pippin’s shoulder. ‘Find what? What are you talking about, little
one?’
For a moment Pippin was silent. Then suddenly in the darkness
he made a noise in his throat: gollum, gollum. ‘Nothing, my precious,’
he added.
The hobbits felt Grishna´kh’s ﬁngers twitch. ‘O ho!’ hissed the
goblin softly. ‘That’s what he means, is it? O ho! Very ve-ry danger-
ous, my little ones.’
‘Perhaps,’ said Merry, now alert and aware of Pippin’s guess.
‘Perhaps; and not only for us. Still you know your own business best.
Do you want it, or not? And what would you give for it?’
‘Do I want it? Do I want it?’ said Grishna´kh, as if puzzled; but
his arms were trembling. ‘What would I give for it? What do you
mean?’
‘We mean,’ said Pippin, choosing his words carefully, ‘that it’s no
good groping in the dark. We could save you time and trouble. But

you must untie our legs ﬁrst, or we’ll do nothing, and say nothing.’
‘My dear tender little fools,’ hissed Grishna´kh, ‘everything you
have, and everything you know, will be got out of you in due time:
everything! You’ll wish there was more that you could tell to satisfy
the Questioner, indeed you will: quite soon. We shan’t hurry the
enquiry. Oh dear no! What do you think you’ve been kept alive for?
My dear little fellows, please believe me when I say that it was not
out of kindness: that’s not even one of Uglu´ k’s faults.’
‘I ﬁnd it quite easy to believe,’ said Merry. ‘But you haven’t got
your prey home yet. And it doesn’t seem to be going your way,
whatever happens. If we come to Isengard, it won’t be the great
Grishna´kh that beneﬁts: Saruman will take all that he can ﬁnd. If
you want anything for yourself, now’s the time to do a deal.’
Grishna´kh began to lose his temper. The name of Saruman seemed
specially to enrage him. Time was passing and the disturbance was
dying down. Uglu´k or the Isengarders might return at any minute.
‘Have you got it – either of you?’ he snarled.
‘Gollum, gollum!’ said Pippin.
‘Untie our legs!’ said Merry.
They felt the Orc’s arms trembling violently. ‘Curse you, you ﬁlthy
little vermin!’ he hissed. ‘Untie your legs? I’ll untie every string in
your bodies. Do you think I can’t search you to the bones? Search
you! I’ll cut you both to quivering shreds. I don’t need the help of
your legs to get you away – and have you all to myself !’
Suddenly he seized them. The strength in his long arms and shoul-
ders was terrifying. He tucked them one under each armpit, and
crushed them ﬁercely to his sides; a great stiﬂing hand was clapped
over each of their mouths. Then he sprang forward, stooping low.
Quickly and silently he went, until he came to the edge of the knoll.
There, choosing a gap between the watchers, he passed like an evil
shadow out into the night, down the slope and away westward
towards the river that ﬂowed out of the forest. In that direction there
was a wide open space with only one ﬁre.
After going a dozen yards he halted, peering and listening. Nothing
could be seen or heard. He crept slowly on, bent almost double.
Then he squatted and listened again. Then he stood up, as if to risk
a sudden dash. At that very moment the dark form of a rider loomed
up right in front of him. A horse snorted and reared. A man called
out.
Grishna´kh ﬂung himself on the ground ﬂat, dragging the hobbits
under him; then he drew his sword. No doubt he meant to kill his
captives, rather than allow them to escape or to be rescued; but it
was his undoing. The sword rang faintly, and glinted a little in the
light of the ﬁre away to his left. An arrow came whistling out of the

gloom: it was aimed with skill, or guided by fate, and it pierced his
right hand. He dropped the sword and shrieked. There was a quick
beat of hoofs, and even as Grishna´kh leaped up and ran, he was
ridden down and a spear passed through him. He gave a hideous
shivering cry and lay still.
The hobbits remained ﬂat on the ground, as Grishna´kh had left
them. Another horseman came riding swiftly to his comrade’s aid.
Whether because of some special keenness of sight, or because of
some other sense, the horse lifted and sprang lightly over them; but
its rider did not see them, lying covered in their elven-cloaks, too
crushed for the moment, and too afraid to move.
At last Merry stirred and whispered softly: ‘So far so good; but
how are we to avoid being spitted?’
The answer came almost immediately. The cries of Grishna´kh had
roused the Orcs. From the yells and screeches that came from the
knoll the hobbits guessed that their disappearance had been dis-
covered: Uglu´k was probably knocking off a few more heads. Then
suddenly the answering cries of orc-voices came from the right, out-
side the circle of watch-ﬁres, from the direction of the forest and the
mountains. Mauhu´r had apparently arrived and was attacking the
besiegers. There was the sound of galloping horses. The Riders were
drawing in their ring close round the knoll, risking the orc-arrows,
so as to prevent any sortie, while a company rode off to deal with
the newcomers. Suddenly Merry and Pippin realized that without
moving they were now outside the circle: there was nothing between
them and escape.
‘Now,’ said Merry, ‘if only we had our legs and hands free, we
might get away. But I can’t touch the knots, and I can’t bite them.’
‘No need to try,’ said Pippin. ‘I was going to tell you: I’ve managed
to free my hands. These loops are only left for show. You’d better
have a bit of lembas ﬁrst.’
He slipped the cords off his wrists, and ﬁshed out a packet. The
cakes were broken, but good, still in their leaf-wrappings. The hobbits
each ate two or three pieces. The taste brought back to them the
memory of fair faces, and laughter, and wholesome food in quiet
days now far away. For a while they ate thoughtfully, sitting in the
dark, heedless of the cries and sounds of battle nearby. Pippin was
the ﬁrst to come back to the present.
‘We must be off,’ he said. ‘Half a moment!’ Grishna´kh’s sword
was lying close at hand, but it was too heavy and clumsy for him to
use; so he crawled forward, and ﬁnding the body of the goblin he
drew from its sheath a long sharp knife. With this he quickly cut their
bonds.

‘Now for it!’ he said. ‘When we’ve warmed up a bit, perhaps we
shall be able to stand again, and walk. But in any case we had better
start by crawling.’
They crawled. The turf was deep and yielding, and that helped
them; but it seemed a long slow business. They gave the watch-ﬁre
a wide berth, and wormed their way forward bit by bit, until they
came to the edge of the river, gurgling away in the black shadows
under its deep banks. Then they looked back.
The sounds had died away. Evidently Mauhu´r and his ‘lads’ had
been killed or driven off. The Riders had returned to their silent
ominous vigil. It would not last very much longer. Already the night
was old. In the East, which had remained unclouded, the sky was
beginning to grow pale.
‘We must get under cover,’ said Pippin, ‘or we shall be seen. It
will not be any comfort to us, if these riders discover that we are not
Orcs after we are dead.’ He got up and stamped his feet. ‘Those
cords have cut me like wires; but my feet are getting warm again. I
could stagger on now. What about you, Merry?’
Merry got up. ‘Yes,’ he said, ‘I can manage it. Lembas does put
heart into you! A more wholesome sort of feeling, too, than the heat
of that orc-draught. I wonder what it was made of. Better not to
know, I expect. Let’s get a drink of water to wash away the thought
of it!’
‘Not here, the banks are too steep,’ said Pippin. ‘Forward now!’
They turned and walked side by side slowly along the line of the
river. Behind them the light grew in the East. As they walked they
compared notes, talking lightly in hobbit-fashion of the things that
had happened since their capture. No listener would have guessed
from their words that they had suffered cruelly, and been in dire
peril, going without hope towards torment and death; or that even
now, as they knew well, they had little chance of ever ﬁnding friend
or safety again.
‘You seem to have been doing well, Master Took,’ said Merry.
‘You will get almost a chapter in old Bilbo’s book, if ever I get a
chance to report to him. Good work: especially guessing that hairy
villain’s little game, and playing up to him. But I wonder if anyone
will ever pick up your trail and ﬁnd that brooch. I should hate to
lose mine, but I am afraid yours is gone for good.
‘I shall have to brush up my toes, if I am to get level with you.
Indeed Cousin Brandybuck is going in front now. This is where he
comes in. I don’t suppose you have much notion where we are; but
I spent my time at Rivendell rather better. We are walking west along
the Entwash. The butt-end of the Misty Mountains is in front, and
Fangorn Forest.’

Even as he spoke the dark edge of the forest loomed up straight
before them. Night seemed to have taken refuge under its great trees,
creeping away from the coming Dawn.
‘Lead on, Master Brandybuck!’ said Pippin. ‘Or lead back! We
have been warned against Fangorn. But one so knowing will not have
forgotten that.’
‘I have not,’ answered Merry; ‘but the forest seems better to me,
all the same, than turning back into the middle of a battle.’
He led the way in under the huge branches of the trees. Old
beyond guessing, they seemed. Great trailing beards of lichen hung
from them, blowing and swaying in the breeze. Out of the shadows
the hobbits peeped, gazing back down the slope: little furtive ﬁgures
that in the dim light looked like elf-children in the deeps of time
peering out of the Wild Wood in wonder at their ﬁrst Dawn.
Far over the Great River, and the Brown Lands, leagues upon
grey leagues away, the Dawn came, red as ﬂame. Loud rang the
hunting-horns to greet it. The Riders of Rohan sprang suddenly to
life. Horn answered horn again.
Merry and Pippin heard, clear in the cold air, the neighing of
war-horses, and the sudden singing of many men. The Sun’s limb
was lifted, an arc of ﬁre, above the margin of the world. Then with
a great cry the Riders charged from the East; the red light gleamed
on mail and spear. The Orcs yelled and shot all the arrows that
remained to them. The hobbits saw several horsemen fall; but their
line held on up the hill and over it, and wheeled round and charged
again. Most of the raiders that were left alive then broke and ﬂed,
this way and that, pursued one by one to the death. But one band,
holding together in a black wedge, drove forward resolutely in the
direction of the forest. Straight up the slope they charged towards
the watchers. Now they were drawing near, and it seemed certain
that they would escape: they had already hewn down three Riders
that barred their way.
‘We have watched too long,’ said Merry. ‘There’s Uglu´k! I don’t
want to meet him again.’ The hobbits turned and ﬂed deep into the
shadows of the wood.
So it was that they did not see the last stand, when Uglu´ k was
overtaken and brought to bay at the very edge of Fangorn. There he
´
was slain at last by Eomer, the Third Marshal of the Mark, who
dismounted and fought him sword to sword. And over the wide ﬁelds
the keen-eyed Riders hunted down the few Orcs that had escaped
and still had strength to ﬂy.
Then when they had laid their fallen comrades in a mound and
had sung their praises, the Riders made a great ﬁre and scattered the

ashes of their enemies. So ended the raid, and no news of it came
ever back either to Mordor or to Isengard; but the smoke of the
burning rose high to heaven and was seen by many watchful eyes.

Chapter 4
T R E E B E A R D
Meanwhile the hobbits went with as much speed as the dark and
tangled forest allowed, following the line of the running stream, west-
ward and up towards the slopes of the mountains, deeper and deeper
into Fangorn. Slowly their fear of the Orcs died away, and their pace
slackened. A queer stiﬂing feeling came over them, as if the air were
too thin or too scanty for breathing.
At last Merry halted. ‘We can’t go on like this,’ he panted. ‘I want
some air.’
‘Let’s have a drink at any rate,’ said Pippin. ‘I’m parched.’ He
clambered on to a great tree-root that wound down into the stream,
and stooping drew up some water in his cupped hands. It was clear
and cold, and he took many draughts. Merry followed him. The
water refreshed them and seemed to cheer their hearts; for a while
they sat together on the brink of the stream, dabbling their sore feet
and legs, and peering round at the trees that stood silently about
them, rank upon rank, until they faded away into grey twilight in
every direction.
‘I suppose you haven’t lost us already?’ said Pippin, leaning back
against a great tree-trunk. ‘We can at least follow the course of this
stream, the Entwash or whatever you call it, and get out again the
way we came.’
‘We could, if our legs would do it,’ said Merry; ‘and if we could
breathe properly.’
‘Yes, it is all very dim, and stuffy, in here,’ said Pippin. ‘It reminds
me, somehow, of the old room in the Great Place of the Tooks away
back in the Smials at Tuckborough: a huge place, where the furniture
has never been moved or changed for generations. They say the Old
Took lived in it year after year, while he and the room got older and
shabbier together – and it has never been changed since he died, a
century ago. And Old Gerontius was my great-great-grandfather: that
puts it back a bit. But that is nothing to the old feeling of this wood.
Look at all those weeping, trailing, beards and whiskers of lichen!
And most of the trees seem to be half covered with ragged dry leaves
that have never fallen. Untidy. I can’t imagine what spring would
look like here, if it ever comes; still less a spring-cleaning.’
‘But the Sun at any rate must peep in sometimes,’ said Merry. ‘It
does not look or feel at all like Bilbo’s description of Mirkwood. That
was all dark and black, and the home of dark black things. This is

just dim, and frightfully tree-ish. You can’t imagine animals living
here at all, or staying for long.’
‘No, nor hobbits,’ said Pippin. ‘And I don’t like the thought of
trying to get through it either. Nothing to eat for a hundred miles, I
should guess. How are our supplies?’
‘Low,’ said Merry. ‘We ran off with nothing but a couple of spare
packets of lembas, and left everything else behind.’ They looked at
what remained of the elven-cakes: broken fragments for about ﬁve
meagre days, that was all. ‘And not a wrap or a blanket,’ said Merry.
‘We shall be cold tonight, whichever way we go.’
‘Well, we’d better decide on the way now,’ said Pippin. ‘The
morning must be getting on.’
Just then they became aware of a yellow light that had appeared,
some way further on into the wood: shafts of sunlight seemed sud-
denly to have pierced the forest-roof.
‘Hullo!’ said Merry. ‘The Sun must have run into a cloud while
we’ve been under these trees, and now she has run out again; or else
she has climbed high enough to look down through some opening.
It isn’t far – let’s go and investigate!’
They found it was further than they thought. The ground was
rising steeply still, and it was becoming increasingly stony. The light
grew broader as they went on, and soon they saw that there was a rock-
wall before them: the side of a hill, or the abrupt end of some long root
thrust out by the distant mountains. No trees grew on it, and the sun
was falling full on its stony face. The twigs of the trees at its foot were
stretched out stiff and still, as if reaching out to the warmth. Where
all had looked so shabby and grey before, the wood now gleamed
with rich browns, and with the smooth black-greys of bark like
polished leather. The boles of the trees glowed with a soft green like
young grass: early spring or a ﬂeeting vision of it was about them.
In the face of the stony wall there was something like a stair:
natural perhaps, and made by the weathering and splitting of the
rock, for it was rough and uneven. High up, almost level with the
tops of forest-trees, there was a shelf under a cliff. Nothing grew
there but a few grasses and weeds at its edge, and one old stump of
a tree with only two bent branches left: it looked almost like the
ﬁgure of some gnarled old man, standing there, blinking in the
morning-light.
‘Up we go!’ said Merry joyfully. ‘Now for a breath of air, and a
sight of the land!’
They climbed and scrambled up the rock. If the stair had been
made it was for bigger feet and longer legs than theirs. They were
too eager to be surprised at the remarkable way in which the cuts

and sores of their captivity had healed and their vigour had returned.
They came at length to the edge of the shelf almost at the feet of the
old stump; then they sprang up and turned round with their backs
to the hill, breathing deep, and looking out eastward. They saw that
they had only come some three or four miles into the forest: the
heads of the trees marched down the slopes towards the plain. There,
near the fringe of the forest, tall spires of curling black smoke went
up, wavering and ﬂoating towards them.
‘The wind’s changing,’ said Merry. ‘It’s turned east again. It feels
cool up here.’
‘Yes,’ said Pippin; ‘I’m afraid this is only a passing gleam, and it
will all go grey again. What a pity! This shaggy old forest looked so
different in the sunlight. I almost felt I liked the place.’
‘Almost felt you liked the Forest! That’s good! That’s uncommonly
kind of you,’ said a strange voice. ‘Turn round and let me have a
look at your faces. I almost feel that I dislike you both, but do not
let us be hasty. Turn around!’ A large knob-knuckled hand was laid
on each of their shoulders, and they were twisted round, gently but
irresistibly; then two great arms lifted them up.
They found that they were looking at a most extraordinary face.
It belonged to a large Man-like, almost Troll-like, ﬁgure, at least
fourteen foot high, very sturdy, with a tall head, and hardly any neck.
Whether it was clad in stuff like green and grey bark, or whether that
was its hide, was difﬁcult to say. At any rate the arms, at a short
distance from the trunk, were not wrinkled, but covered with a brown
smooth skin. The large feet had seven toes each. The lower part of
the long face was covered with a sweeping grey beard, bushy, almost
twiggy at the roots, thin and mossy at the ends. But at the moment
the hobbits noted little but the eyes. These deep eyes were now
surveying them, slow and solemn, but very penetrating. They were
brown, shot with a green light. Often afterwards Pippin tried to
describe his ﬁrst impression of them.
‘One felt as if there was an enormous well behind them, ﬁlled up
with ages of memory and long, slow, steady thinking; but their surface
was sparkling with the present; like sun shimmering on the outer
leaves of a vast tree, or on the ripples of a very deep lake. I don’t
know, but it felt as if something that grew in the ground – asleep,
you might say, or just feeling itself as something between root-tip
and leaf-tip, between deep earth and sky had suddenly waked up,
and was considering you with the same slow care that it had given
to its own inside affairs for endless years.’
‘Hrum, Hoom,’ murmured the voice, a deep voice like a very deep
woodwind instrument. ‘Very odd indeed! Do not be hasty, that is

my motto. But if I had seen you, before I heard your voices – I liked
them: nice little voices; they reminded me of something I cannot
remember – if I had seen you before I heard you, I should have just
trodden on you, taking you for little Orcs, and found out my mistake
afterwards. Very odd you are, indeed. Root and twig, very odd!’
Pippin, though still amazed, no longer felt afraid. Under those
eyes he felt a curious suspense, but not fear. ‘Please,’ he said, ‘who
are you? And what are you?’
A queer look came into the old eyes, a kind of wariness; the deep
wells were covered over. ‘Hrum, now,’ answered the voice; ‘well, I
am an Ent, or that’s what they call me. Yes, Ent is the word. The
Ent, I am, you might say, in your manner of speaking. Fangorn is my
name according to some, Treebeard others make it. Treebeard will do.’
‘An Ent?’ said Merry. ‘What’s that? But what do you call yourself ?
What’s your real name?’
‘Hoo now!’ replied Treebeard. ‘Hoo! Now that would be telling!
Not so hasty. And I am doing the asking. You are in my country.
What are you, I wonder? I cannot place you. You do not seem to
come in the old lists that I learned when I was young. But that was
a long, long time ago, and they may have made new lists. Let me
see! Let me see! How did it go?
Learn now the lore of Living Creatures!
First name the four, the free peoples:
Eldest of all, the elf-children;
Dwarf the delver, dark are his houses;
Ent the earthborn, old as mountains;
Man the mortal, master of horses:
Hm, hm, hm.
Beaver the builder, buck the leaper,
Bear bee-hunter, boar the ﬁghter;
Hound is hungry, hare is fearful . . .
hm, hm.
Eagle in eyrie, ox in pasture,
Hart horn-crowne´d; hawk is swiftest,
Swan the whitest, serpent coldest . . .
Hoom, hm; hoom, hm, how did it go? Room tum, room tum, roomty
toom tum. It was a long list. But anyway you do not seem to ﬁt in
anywhere!’

‘We always seem to have got left out of the old lists, and the old
stories,’ said Merry. ‘Yet we’ve been about for quite a long time.
We’re hobbits.’
‘Why not make a new line?’ said Pippin.
‘Half-grown hobbits, the hole-dwellers.
Put us in amongst the four, next to Man (the Big People) and you’ve
got it.’
‘Hm! Not bad, not bad,’ said Treebeard. ‘That would do. So you
live in holes, eh? It sounds very right and proper. Who calls you
hobbits, though? That does not sound Elvish to me. Elves made all
the old words: they began it.’
‘Nobody else calls us hobbits; we call ourselves that,’ said Pippin.
‘Hoom, hmm! Come now! Not so hasty! You call yourselves
hobbits? But you should not go telling just anybody. You’ll be letting
out your own right names if you’re not careful.’
‘We aren’t careful about that,’ said Merry. ‘As a matter of fact
I’m a Brandybuck, Meriadoc Brandybuck, though most people call
me just Merry.’
‘And I’m a Took, Peregrin Took, but I’m generally called Pippin,
or even Pip.’
‘Hm, but you are hasty folk, I see,’ said Treebeard. ‘I am honoured
by your conﬁdence; but you should not be too free all at once. There
are Ents and Ents, you know; or there are Ents and things that look
like Ents but ain’t, as you might say. I’ll call you Merry and Pippin,
if you please – nice names. For I am not going to tell you my name,
not yet at any rate.’ A queer half-knowing, half-humorous look came
with a green ﬂicker into his eyes. ‘For one thing it would take a
long while: my name is growing all the time, and I’ve lived a very
long, long time; so my name is like a story. Real names tell you the
story of the things they belong to in my language, in the Old Entish
as you might say. It is a lovely language, but it takes a very long time
to say anything in it, because we do not say anything in it, unless it
is worth taking a long time to say, and to listen to.
‘But now,’ and the eyes became very bright and ‘present’, seeming
to grow smaller and almost sharp, ‘what is going on? What are you
doing in it all? I can see and hear (and smell and feel) a great deal from
this, from this, from this a-lalla-lalla-rumba-kamanda-lind-or-buru´me¨.
Excuse me: that is a part of my name for it; I do not know what the
word is in the outside languages: you know, the thing we are on,
where I stand and look out on ﬁne mornings, and think about the
Sun, and the grass beyond the wood, and the horses, and the clouds,
and the unfolding of the world. What is going on? What is Gandalf

up to? And these – bura´rum,’ he made a deep rumbling noise like a
discord on a great organ – ‘these Orcs, and young Saruman down at
Isengard? I like news. But not too quick now.’
‘There is quite a lot going on,’ said Merry; ‘and even if we tried
to be quick, it would take a long time to tell. But you told us not to
be hasty. Ought we to tell you anything so soon? Would you think
it rude, if we asked what you are going to do with us, and which side
you are on? And did you know Gandalf ?’
‘Yes, I do know him: the only wizard that really cares about trees,’
said Treebeard. ‘Do you know him?’
‘Yes,’ said Pippin sadly, ‘we did. He was a great friend, and he
was our guide.’
‘Then I can answer your other questions,’ said Treebeard. ‘I am
not going to do anything with you: not if you mean by that ‘‘do
something to you’’ without your leave. We might do some things
together. I don’t know about sides. I go my own way; but your way
may go along with mine for a while. But you speak of Master Gandalf,
as if he was in a story that had come to an end.’
‘Yes, we do,’ said Pippin sadly. ‘The story seems to be going on,
but I am afraid Gandalf has fallen out of it.’
‘Hoo, come now!’ said Treebeard. ‘Hoom, hm, ah well.’ He
paused, looking long at the hobbits. ‘Hoom, ah, well I do not know
what to say. Come now!’
‘If you would like to hear more,’ said Merry, ‘we will tell you. But
it will take some time. Wouldn’t you like to put us down? Couldn’t
we sit here together in the sun, while it lasts? You must be getting
tired of holding us up.’
‘Hm, tired? No, I am not tired. I do not easily get tired. And I do
not sit down. I am not very, hm, bendable. But there, the Sun is
going in. Let us leave this – did you say what you call it?’
‘Hill?’ suggested Pippin. ‘Shelf ? Step?’ suggested Merry.
Treebeard repeated the words thoughtfully. ‘Hill. Yes, that was
it. But it is a hasty word for a thing that has stood here ever since
this part of the world was shaped. Never mind. Let us leave it,
and go.’
‘Where shall we go?’ asked Merry.
‘To my home, or one of my homes,’ answered Treebeard.
‘Is it far?’
‘I do not know. You might call it far, perhaps. But what does that
matter?’
‘Well, you see, we have lost all our belongings,’ said Merry. ‘We
have only a little food.’
‘O! Hm! You need not trouble about that,’ said Treebeard. ‘I can
give you a drink that will keep you green and growing for a long,

long while. And if we decide to part company, I can set you down
outside my country at any point you choose. Let us go!’
Holding the hobbits gently but ﬁrmly, one in the crook of each
arm, Treebeard lifted up ﬁrst one large foot and then the other, and
moved them to the edge of the shelf. The rootlike toes grasped the
rocks. Then carefully and solemnly, he stalked down from step to
step, and reached the ﬂoor of the Forest.
At once he set off with long deliberate strides through the trees,
deeper and deeper into the wood, never far from the stream, climbing
steadily up towards the slopes of the mountains. Many of the trees
seemed asleep, or as unaware of him as of any other creature that
merely passed by; but some quivered, and some raised up their
branches above his head as he approached. All the while, as he
walked, he talked to himself in a long running stream of musical
sounds.
The hobbits were silent for some time. They felt, oddly enough,
safe and comfortable, and they had a great deal to think and wonder
about. At last Pippin ventured to speak again.
‘Please, Treebeard,’ he said, ‘could I ask you something? Why did
Celeborn warn us against your forest? He told us not to risk getting
entangled in it.’
‘Hmm, did he now?’ rumbled Treebeard. ‘And I might have said
much the same, if you had been going the other way. Do not risk
getting entangled in the woods of Laurelindo´renan! That is what the
Elves used to call it, but now they make the name shorter: Lothlo´rien
they call it. Perhaps they are right: maybe it is fading, not growing.
Land of the Valley of Singing Gold, that was it, once upon a time.
Now it is the Dreamﬂower. Ah well! But it is a queer place, and not
for just anyone to venture in. I am surprised that you ever got out,
but much more surprised that you ever got in: that has not happened
to strangers for many a year. It is a queer land.
‘And so is this. Folk have come to grief here. Aye, they have, to
grief. Laurelindo´renan lindelorendor malinorne´lion ornemalin,’ he
hummed to himself. ‘They are falling rather behind the world in there,
I guess,’ he said. ‘Neither this country, nor anything else outside the
Golden Wood, is what it was when Celeborn was young. Still:
Taurelilo´me¨a-tumbalemorna Tumbaletaure¨a Lo´me¨anor*
that is what they used to say. Things have changed, but it is still true
in places.’
* See Appendix F under Ents.

‘What do you mean?’ said Pippin. ‘What is true?’
‘The trees and the Ents,’ said Treebeard. ‘I do not understand all
that goes on myself, so I cannot explain it to you. Some of us are
still true Ents, and lively enough in our fashion, but many are growing
sleepy, going tree-ish, as you might say. Most of the trees are just
trees, of course; but many are half awake. Some are quite wide awake,
and a few are, well, ah, well getting Entish. That is going on all the
time.
‘When that happens to a tree, you ﬁnd that some have bad hearts.
Nothing to do with their wood: I do not mean that. Why, I knew
some good old willows down the Entwash, gone long ago, alas! They
were quite hollow, indeed they were falling all to pieces, but as quiet
and sweet-spoken as a young leaf. And then there are some trees in
the valleys under the mountains, sound as a bell, and bad right
through. That sort of thing seems to spread. There used to be some
very dangerous parts in this country. There are still some very black
patches.’
‘Like the Old Forest away to the north, do you mean?’ asked
Merry.
‘Aye, aye, something like, but much worse. I do not doubt there
is some shadow of the Great Darkness lying there still away north;
and bad memories are handed down. But there are hollow dales in
this land where the Darkness has never been lifted, and the trees are
older than I am. Still, we do what we can. We keep off strangers and
the foolhardy; and we train and we teach, we walk and we weed.
‘We are tree-herds, we old Ents. Few enough of us are left now.
Sheep get like shepherd, and shepherds like sheep, it is said; but
slowly, and neither have long in the world. It is quicker and closer
with trees and Ents, and they walk down the ages together. For Ents
are more like Elves: less interested in themselves than Men are, and
better at getting inside other things. And yet again Ents are more
like Men, more changeable than Elves are, and quicker at taking the
colour of the outside, you might say. Or better than both: for they
are steadier and keep their minds on things longer.
‘Some of my kin look just like trees now, and need something
great to rouse them; and they speak only in whispers. But some of
my trees are limb-lithe, and many can talk to me. Elves began it, of
course, waking trees up and teaching them to speak and learning
their tree-talk. They always wished to talk to everything, the old Elves
did. But then the Great Darkness came, and they passed away over
the Sea, or ﬂed into far valleys, and hid themselves, and made songs
about days that would never come again. Never again. Aye, aye, there
was all one wood once upon a time from here to the Mountains of
Lune, and this was just the East End.

‘Those were the broad days! Time was when I could walk and
sing all day and hear no more than the echo of my own voice in the
hollow hills. The woods were like the woods of Lothlo´rien, only
thicker, stronger, younger. And the smell of the air! I used to spend
a week just breathing.’
Treebeard fell silent, striding along, and yet making hardly a sound
with his great feet. Then he began to hum again, and passed into a
murmuring chant. Gradually the hobbits became aware that he was
chanting to them:
In the willow-meads of Tasarinan I walked in the Spring.
Ah! the sight and the smell of the Spring in Nan-tasarion!
And I said that was good.
I wandered in Summer in the elm-woods of Ossiriand.
Ah! the light and the music in the Summer by the Seven Rivers of
Ossir!
And I thought that was best.
To the beeches of Neldoreth I came in the Autumn.
Ah! the gold and the red and the sighing of leaves in the Autumn
in Taur-na-neldor!
It was more than my desire.
To the pine-trees upon the highland of Dorthonion I climbed in the
Winter.
Ah! the wind and the whiteness and the black branches of Winter
upon Orod-na-Thoˆn!
My voice went up and sang in the sky.
And now all those lands lie under the wave,
And I walk in Ambaro´na, in Tauremorna, in Aldalo´me¨,
In my own land, in the country of Fangorn,
Where the roots are long,
And the years lie thicker than the leaves
In Tauremornalo´me¨.
He ended, and strode on silently, and in all the wood, as far as ear
could reach, there was not a sound.
The day waned, and dusk was twined about the boles of the trees.
At last the hobbits saw, rising dimly before them, a steep dark land:
they had come to the feet of the mountains, and to the green roots
of tall Methedras. Down the hillside the young Entwash, leaping
from its springs high above, ran noisily from step to step to meet
them. On the right of the stream there was a long slope, clad with
grass, now grey in the twilight. No trees grew there and it was open
to the sky; stars were shining already in lakes between shores of cloud.

Treebeard strode up the slope, hardly slackening his pace. Sud-
denly before them the hobbits saw a wide opening. Two great trees
stood there, one on either side, like living gate-posts; but there was
no gate save their crossing and interwoven boughs. As the old Ent
approached, the trees lifted up their branches, and all their leaves
quivered and rustled. For they were evergreen trees, and their leaves
were dark and polished, and gleamed in the twilight. Beyond them
was a wide level space, as though the ﬂoor of a great hall had been
cut in the side of the hill. On either hand the walls sloped upwards,
until they were ﬁfty feet high or more, and along each wall stood an
aisle of trees that also increased in height as they marched inwards.
At the far end the rock-wall was sheer, but at the bottom it had
been hollowed back into a shallow bay with an arched roof: the only
roof of the hall, save the branches of the trees, which at the inner
end overshadowed all the ground leaving only a broad open path in
the middle. A little stream escaped from the springs above, and leav-
ing the main water, fell tinkling down the sheer face of the wall,
pouring in silver drops, like a ﬁne curtain in front of the arched bay.
The water was gathered again into a stone basin in the ﬂoor between
the trees, and thence it spilled and ﬂowed away beside the open path,
out to rejoin the Entwash in its journey through the forest.
‘Hm! Here we are!’ said Treebeard, breaking his long silence. ‘I
have brought you about seventy thousand ent-strides, but what that
comes to in the measurement of your land I do not know. Anyhow
we are near the roots of the Last Mountain. Part of the name of this
place might be Wellinghall, if it were turned into your language. I
like it. We will stay here tonight.’ He set them down on the grass
between the aisles of the trees, and they followed him towards the
great arch. The hobbits now noticed that as he walked his knees
hardly bent, but his legs opened in a great stride. He planted his big
toes (and they were indeed big, and very broad) on the ground ﬁrst,
before any other part of his feet.
For a moment Treebeard stood under the rain of the falling spring,
and took a deep breath; then he laughed, and passed inside. A great
stone table stood there, but no chairs. At the back of the bay it was
already quite dark. Treebeard lifted two great vessels and stood them
on the table. They seemed to be ﬁlled with water; but he held his
hands over them, and immediately they began to glow, one with a
golden and the other with a rich green light; and the blending of the
two lights lit the bay, as if the sun of summer was shining through a
roof of young leaves. Looking back, the hobbits saw that the trees in
the court had also begun to glow, faintly at ﬁrst, but steadily quicken-
ing, until every leaf was edged with light: some green, some gold,

some red as copper; while the tree-trunks looked like pillars moulded
out of luminous stone.
‘Well, well, now we can talk again,’ said Treebeard. ‘You are
thirsty, I expect. Perhaps you are also tired. Drink this!’ He went to
the back of the bay, and then they saw that several tall stone jars
stood there, with heavy lids. He removed one of the lids, and dipped
in a great ladle, and with it ﬁlled three bowls, one very large bowl,
and two smaller ones.
‘This is an ent-house,’ he said, ‘and there are no seats, I fear. But
you may sit on the table.’ Picking up the hobbits he set them on the
great stone slab, six feet above the ground, and there they sat dangling
their legs, and drinking in sips.
The drink was like water, indeed very like the taste of the draughts
they had drunk from the Entwash near the borders of the forest, and
yet there was some scent or savour in it which they could not describe:
it was faint, but it reminded them of the smell of a distant wood
borne from afar by a cool breeze at night. The effect of the draught
began at the toes, and rose steadily through every limb, bringing
refreshment and vigour as it coursed upwards, right to the tips of the
hair. Indeed the hobbits felt that the hair on their heads was actually
standing up, waving and curling and growing. As for Treebeard, he
ﬁrst laved his feet in the basin beyond the arch, and then he drained
his bowl at one draught, one long, slow draught. The hobbits thought
he would never stop.
At last he set the bowl down again. ‘Ah – ah,’ he sighed. ‘Hm,
hoom, now we can talk easier. You can sit on the ﬂoor, and I will
lie down; that will prevent this drink from rising to my head and
sending me to sleep.’
On the right side of the bay there was a great bed on low legs, not
more than a couple of feet high, covered deep in dried grass and
bracken. Treebeard lowered himself slowly on to this (with only the
slightest sign of bending at his middle), until he lay at full length,
with his arms behind his head, looking up at the ceiling, upon which
lights were ﬂickering, like the play of leaves in the sunshine. Merry
and Pippin sat beside him on pillows of grass.
‘Now tell me your tale, and do not hurry!’ said Treebeard.
The hobbits began to tell him the story of their adventures ever
since they left Hobbiton. They followed no very clear order, for they
interrupted one another continually, and Treebeard often stopped
the speaker, and went back to some earlier point, or jumped forward
asking questions about later events. They said nothing whatever about
the Ring, and did not tell him why they set out or where they were
going to; and he did not ask for any reasons.

He was immensely interested in everything: in the Black Riders,
in Elrond, and Rivendell, in the Old Forest, and Tom Bombadil, in
the Mines of Moria, and in Lothlo´rien and Galadriel. He made them
describe the Shire and its country over and over again. He said an
odd thing at this point. ‘You never see any, hm, any Ents round
there, do you?’ he asked. ‘Well, not Ents, Entwives I should really
say.’
‘Entwives?’ said Pippin. ‘Are they like you at all?’
‘Yes, hm, well no: I do not really know now,’ said Treebeard
thoughtfully. ‘But they would like your country, so I just wondered.’
Treebeard was however especially interested in everything that
concerned Gandalf; and most interested of all in Saruman’s doings.
The hobbits regretted very much that they knew so little about them:
only a rather vague report by Sam of what Gandalf had told the
Council. But they were clear at any rate that Uglu´k and his troop
came from Isengard, and spoke of Saruman as their master.
‘Hm, hoom!’ said Treebeard, when at last their story had wound
and wandered down to the battle of the Orcs and the Riders of
Rohan. ‘Well, well! That is a bundle of news and no mistake. You
have not told me all, no indeed, not by a long way. But I do not
doubt that you are doing as Gandalf would wish. There is something
very big going on, that I can see, and what it is maybe I shall learn
in good time, or in bad time. By root and twig, but it is a strange
business: up sprout a little folk that are not in the old lists, and behold!
the Nine forgotten Riders reappear to hunt them, and Gandalf takes
them on a great journey, and Galadriel harbours them in Caras
Galadhon, and Orcs pursue them down all the leagues of Wilderland:
indeed they seem to be caught up in a great storm. I hope they
weather it!’
‘And what about yourself ?’ asked Merry.
‘Hoom, hm, I have not troubled about the Great Wars,’ said
Treebeard; ‘they mostly concern Elves and Men. That is the business
of Wizards: Wizards are always troubled about the future. I do not
like worrying about the future. I am not altogether on anybody’s side,
because nobody is altogether on my side, if you understand me:
nobody cares for the woods as I care for them, not even Elves now-
adays. Still, I take more kindly to Elves than to others: it was the
Elves that cured us of dumbness long ago, and that was a great gift
that cannot be forgotten, though our ways have parted since. And
there are some things, of course, whose side I am altogether not on;
I am against them altogether: these – bura´rum’ (he again made a deep
rumble of disgust) ‘——these Orcs, and their masters.
‘I used to be anxious when the shadow lay on Mirkwood, but
when it removed to Mordor, I did not trouble for a while: Mordor

is a long way away. But it seems that the wind is setting East, and
the withering of all woods may be drawing near. There is naught that
an old Ent can do to hold back that storm: he must weather it or
crack.
‘But Saruman now! Saruman is a neighbour: I cannot overlook
him. I must do something, I suppose. I have often wondered lately
what I should do about Saruman.’
‘Who is Saruman?’ asked Pippin. ‘Do you know anything about
his history?’
‘Saruman is a Wizard,’ answered Treebeard. ‘More than that I
cannot say. I do not know the history of Wizards. They appeared
ﬁrst after the Great Ships came over the Sea; but if they came with
the Ships I never can tell. Saruman was reckoned great among them,
I believe. He gave up wandering about and minding the affairs of
Men and Elves, some time ago – you would call it a very long time
ago; and he settled down at Angrenost, or Isengard as the Men of
Rohan call it. He was very quiet to begin with, but his fame began
to grow. He was chosen to be the head of the White Council, they
say; but that did not turn out too well. I wonder now if even then
Saruman was not turning to evil ways. But at any rate he used to
give no trouble to his neighbours. I used to talk to him. There was
a time when he was always walking about my woods. He was polite
in those days, always asking my leave (at least when he met me); and
always eager to listen. I told him many things that he would never
have found out by himself; but he never repaid me in like kind. I
cannot remember that he ever told me anything. And he got more
and more like that; his face, as I remember it – I have not seen it for
many a day – became like windows in a stone wall: windows with
shutters inside.
‘I think that I now understand what he is up to. He is plotting to
become a Power. He has a mind of metal and wheels; and he does
not care for growing things, except as far as they serve him for the
moment. And now it is clear that he is a black traitor. He has taken
up with foul folk, with the Orcs. Brm, hoom! Worse than that: he
has been doing something to them; something dangerous. For these
Isengarders are more like wicked Men. It is a mark of evil things that
came in the Great Darkness that they cannot abide the Sun; but
Saruman’s Orcs can endure it, even if they hate it. I wonder what
he has done? Are they Men he has ruined, or has he blended the
races of Orcs and Men? That would be a black evil!’
Treebeard rumbled for a moment, as if he were pronouncing some
deep, subterranean Entish malediction. ‘Some time ago I began to
wonder how Orcs dared to pass through my woods so freely,’ he
went on. ‘Only lately did I guess that Saruman was to blame, and

that long ago he had been spying out all the ways, and discovering
my secrets. He and his foul folk are making havoc now. Down on
the borders they are felling trees – good trees. Some of the trees they
just cut down and leave to rot – orc-mischief that; but most are hewn
up and carried off to feed the ﬁres of Orthanc. There is always a
smoke rising from Isengard these days.
‘Curse him, root and branch! Many of those trees were my friends,
creatures I had known from nut and acorn; many had voices of their
own that are lost for ever now. And there are wastes of stump and
bramble where once there were singing groves. I have been idle. I
have let things slip. It must stop!’
Treebeard raised himself from his bed with a jerk, stood up, and
thumped his hand on the table. The vessels of light trembled and
sent up two jets of ﬂame. There was a ﬂicker like green ﬁre in his
eyes, and his beard stood out stiff as a great besom.
‘I will stop it!’ he boomed. ‘And you shall come with me. You
may be able to help me. You will be helping your own friends that
way, too; for if Saruman is not checked Rohan and Gondor will have
an enemy behind as well as in front. Our roads go together – to
Isengard!’
‘We will come with you,’ said Merry. ‘We will do what we can.’
‘Yes!’ said Pippin. ‘I should like to see the White Hand overthrown.
I should like to be there, even if I could not be of much use: I shall
never forget Uglu´ k and the crossing of Rohan.’
‘Good! Good!’ said Treebeard. ‘But I spoke hastily. We must not
be hasty. I have become too hot. I must cool myself and think; for
it is easier to shout stop! than to do it.’
He strode to the archway and stood for some time under the falling
rain of the spring. Then he laughed and shook himself, and wherever
the drops of water fell glittering from him to the ground they glinted
like red and green sparks. He came back and laid himself on the bed
again and was silent.
After some time the hobbits heard him murmuring again. He
seemed to be counting on his ﬁngers. ‘Fangorn, Finglas, Fladrif, aye,
aye,’ he sighed. ‘The trouble is that there are so few of us left,’ he
said turning towards the hobbits. ‘Only three remain of the ﬁrst Ents
that walked in the woods before the Darkness: only myself, Fangorn,
and Finglas and Fladrif – to give them their Elvish names; you may
call them Leaﬂock and Skinbark if you like that better. And of us
three, Leaﬂock and Skinbark are not much use for this business.
Leaﬂock has grown sleepy, almost tree-ish, you might say: he has
taken to standing by himself half-asleep all through the summer with
the deep grass of the meadows round his knees. Covered with leafy

hair he is. He used to rouse up in winter; but of late he has been too
drowsy to walk far even then. Skinbark lived on the mountain-slopes
west of Isengard. That is where the worst trouble has been. He was
wounded by the Orcs, and many of his folk and his tree-herds have
been murdered and destroyed. He has gone up into the high places,
among the birches that he loves best, and he will not come down.
Still, I daresay I could get together a fair company of our younger
folks – if I could make them understand the need; if I could rouse
them: we are not a hasty folk. What a pity there are so few of us!’
‘Why are there so few, when you have lived in this country so
long?’ asked Pippin. ‘Have a great many died?’
‘Oh, no!’ said Treebeard. ‘None have died from inside, as you
might say. Some have fallen in the evil chances of the long years, of
course; and more have grown tree-ish. But there were never many
of us and we have not increased. There have been no Entings – no
children, you would say, not for a terrible long count of years. You
see, we lost the Entwives.’
‘How very sad!’ said Pippin. ‘How was it that they all died?’
‘They did not die!’ said Treebeard. ‘I never said died. We lost
them, I said. We lost them and we cannot ﬁnd them.’ He sighed. ‘I
thought most folk knew that. There were songs about the hunt of
the Ents for the Entwives sung among Elves and Men from Mirkwood
to Gondor. They cannot be quite forgotten.’
‘Well, I am afraid the songs have not come west over the Moun-
tains to the Shire,’ said Merry. ‘Won’t you tell us some more, or sing
us one of the songs?’
‘Yes, I will indeed,’ said Treebeard, seeming pleased with the
request. ‘But I cannot tell it properly, only in short; and then we
must end our talk: tomorrow we have councils to call, and work to
do, and maybe a journey to begin.’
‘It is rather a strange and sad story,’ he went on after a pause.
‘When the world was young, and the woods were wide and wild, the
Ents and the Entwives – and there were Entmaidens then: ah! the
loveliness of Fimbrethil, of Wandlimb the lightfooted, in the days of
our youth! – they walked together and they housed together. But our
hearts did not go on growing in the same way: the Ents gave their
love to things that they met in the world, and the Entwives gave their
thought to other things, for the Ents loved the great trees, and the
wild woods, and the slopes of the high hills; and they drank of the
mountain-streams, and ate only such fruit as the trees let fall in their
path; and they learned of the Elves and spoke with the Trees. But
the Entwives gave their minds to the lesser trees, and to the meads
in the sunshine beyond the feet of the forests; and they saw the sloe

in the thicket, and the wild apple and the cherry blossoming in spring,
and the green herbs in the waterlands in summer, and the seeding
grasses in the autumn ﬁelds. They did not desire to speak with these
things; but they wished them to hear and obey what was said to them.
The Entwives ordered them to grow according to their wishes, and
bear leaf and fruit to their liking; for the Entwives desired order, and
plenty, and peace (by which they meant that things should remain
where they had set them). So the Entwives made gardens to live in.
But we Ents went on wandering, and we only came to the gardens
now and again. Then when the Darkness came in the North, the
Entwives crossed the Great River, and made new gardens, and tilled
new ﬁelds, and we saw them more seldom. After the Darkness was
overthrown the land of the Entwives blossomed richly, and their ﬁelds
were full of corn. Many men learned the crafts of the Entwives and
honoured them greatly; but we were only a legend to them, a secret
in the heart of the forest. Yet here we still are, while all the gardens
of the Entwives are wasted: Men call them the Brown Lands now.
‘I remember it was long ago – in the time of the war between
Sauron and the Men of the Sea – desire came over me to see Fimbre-
thil again. Very fair she was still in my eyes, when I had last seen
her, though little like the Entmaiden of old. For the Entwives were
bent and browned by their labour; their hair parched by the sun to
the hue of ripe corn and their cheeks like red apples. Yet their eyes
were still the eyes of our own people. We crossed over Anduin and
came to their land; but we found a desert: it was all burned and
uprooted, for war had passed over it. But the Entwives were not
there. Long we called, and long we searched; and we asked all folk
that we met which way the Entwives had gone. Some said they had
never seen them; and some said that they had seen them walking
away west, and some said east, and others south. But nowhere that
we went could we ﬁnd them. Our sorrow was very great. Yet the
wild wood called, and we returned to it. For many years we used to
go out every now and again and look for the Entwives, walking far
and wide and calling them by their beautiful names. But as time
passed we went more seldom and wandered less far. And now the
Entwives are only a memory for us, and our beards are long and
grey. The Elves made many songs concerning the Search of the Ents,
and some of the songs passed into the tongues of Men. But we made
no songs about it, being content to chant their beautiful names when
we thought of the Entwives. We believe that we may meet again in
a time to come, and perhaps we shall ﬁnd somewhere a land where
we can live together and both be content. But it is foreboded that
that will only be when we have both lost all that we now have. And
it may well be that that time is drawing near at last. For if Sauron

of old destroyed the gardens, the Enemy today seems likely to wither
all the woods.
‘There was an Elvish song that spoke of this, or at least so I
understand it. It used to be sung up and down the Great River. It
was never an Entish song, mark you: it would have been a very long
song in Entish! But we know it by heart, and hum it now and again.
This is how it runs in your tongue:
ent.
When Spring unfolds the beechen leaf, and sap is in the bough;
When light is on the wild-wood stream, and wind is on the
brow;
When stride is long, and breath is deep, and keen the
mountain-air,
Come back to me! Come back to me, and say my land is fair!
entwife. When Spring is come to garth and ﬁeld, and corn is in the
blade;
When blossom like a shining snow is on the orchard laid;
When shower and Sun upon the Earth with fragrance ﬁll the
air,
I’ll linger here, and will not come, because my land is fair.
ent.
When Summer lies upon the world, and in a noon of gold
Beneath the roof of sleeping leaves the dreams of trees unfold;
When woodland halls are green and cool, and wind is in the
West,
Come back to me! Come back to me, and say my land is best!
entwife. When Summer warms the hanging fruit and burns the berry
brown;
When straw is gold, and ear is white, and harvest comes to
town;
When honey spills, and apple swells, though wind be in the
West,
I’ll linger here beneath the Sun, because my land is best!
ent.
When Winter comes, the winter wild that hill and wood shall
slay;
When trees shall fall and starless night devour the sunless day;
When wind is in the deadly East, then in the bitter rain
I’ll look for thee, and call to thee; I’ll come to thee again!
entwife. When Winter comes, and singing ends; when darkness falls at
last;
When broken is the barren bough, and light and labour past;
I’ll look for thee, and wait for thee, until we meet again:
Together we will take the road beneath the bitter rain!
both.
Together we will take the road that leads into the West,
And far away will ﬁnd a land where both our hearts may rest.’

Treebeard ended his song. ‘That is how it goes,’ he said. ‘It is Elvish,
of course: lighthearted, quickworded, and soon over. I daresay it is
fair enough. But the Ents could say more on their side, if they had
time! But now I am going to stand up and take a little sleep. Where
will you stand?’
‘We usually lie down to sleep,’ said Merry. ‘We shall be all right
where we are.’
‘Lie down to sleep!’ said Treebeard. ‘Why of course you do! Hm,
hoom: I was forgetting: singing that song put me in mind of old
times; almost thought that I was talking to young Entings, I did.
Well, you can lie on the bed. I am going to stand in the rain. Good
night!’
Merry and Pippin climbed on to the bed and curled up in the soft
grass and fern. It was fresh, and sweet-scented, and warm. The lights
died down, and the glow of the trees faded; but outside under the
arch they could see old Treebeard standing, motionless, with his
arms raised above his head. The bright stars peered out of the sky,
and lit the falling water as it spilled on to his ﬁngers and head, and
dripped, dripped, in hundreds of silver drops on to his feet. Listening
to the tinkling of the drops the hobbits fell asleep.
They woke to ﬁnd a cool sun shining into the great court, and on
to the ﬂoor of the bay. Shreds of high cloud were overhead, running
on a stiff easterly wind. Treebeard was not to be seen; but while
Merry and Pippin were bathing in the basin by the arch, they heard
him humming and singing, as he came up the path between the trees.
‘Hoo, ho! Good morning, Merry and Pippin!’ he boomed, when
he saw them. ‘You sleep long. I have been many a hundred strides
already today. Now we will have a drink, and go to Entmoot.’
He poured them out two full bowls from a stone jar; but from a
different jar. The taste was not the same as it had been the night
before: it was earthier and richer, more sustaining and food-like, so
to speak. While the hobbits drank, sitting on the edge of the bed,
and nibbling small pieces of elf-cake (more because they felt that
eating was a necessary part of breakfast than because they felt
hungry), Treebeard stood, humming in Entish or Elvish or some
strange tongue, and looking up at the sky.
‘Where is Entmoot?’ Pippin ventured to ask.
‘Hoo, eh? Entmoot?’ said Treebeard, turning round. ‘It is not a
place, it is a gathering of Ents – which does not often happen nowadays.
But I have managed to make a fair number promise to come. We shall
meet in the place where we have always met: Derndingle Men call it.
It is away south from here. We must be there before noon.’
Before long they set off. Treebeard carried the hobbits in his arms

as on the previous day. At the entrance to the court he turned to the
right, stepped over the stream, and strode away southwards along
the feet of great tumbled slopes where trees were scanty. Above these
the hobbits saw thickets of birch and rowan, and beyond them dark
climbing pinewoods. Soon Treebeard turned a little away from the
hills and plunged into deep groves, where the trees were larger, taller,
and thicker than any that the hobbits had ever seen before. For a
while they felt faintly the sense of stiﬂing which they had noticed
when they ﬁrst ventured into Fangorn, but it soon passed. Treebeard
did not talk to them. He hummed to himself deeply and thoughtfully,
but Merry and Pippin caught no proper words: it sounded like boom,
boom, rumboom, boorar, boom boom, dahrar boom boom, dahrar boom,
and so on with a constant change of note and rhythm. Now and
again they thought they heard an answer, a hum or a quiver of sound,
that seemed to come out of the earth, or from boughs above their
heads, or perhaps from the boles of the trees; but Treebeard did not
stop or turn his head to either side.
They had been going for a long while – Pippin had tried to keep
count of the ‘ent-strides’ but had failed, getting lost at about three
thousand – when Treebeard began to slacken his pace. Suddenly he
stopped, put the hobbits down, and raised his curled hands to his
mouth so that they made a hollow tube; then he blew or called
through them. A great hoom, hom rang out like a deep-throated horn
in the woods, and seemed to echo from the trees. Far off there came
from several directions a similar hoom, hom, hoom that was not an
echo but an answer.
Treebeard now perched Merry and Pippin on his shoulders and
strode on again, every now and then sending out another horn-call,
and each time the answers came louder and nearer. In this way they
came at last to what looked like an impenetrable wall of dark ever-
green trees, trees of a kind that the hobbits had never seen before:
they branched out right from the roots, and were densely clad in dark
glossy leaves like thornless holly, and they bore many stiff upright
ﬂower-spikes with large shining olive-coloured buds.
Turning to the left and skirting this huge hedge Treebeard came
in a few strides to a narrow entrance. Through it a worn path passed
and dived suddenly down a long steep slope. The hobbits saw that
they were descending into a great dingle, almost as round as a bowl,
very wide and deep, crowned at the rim with the high dark evergreen
hedge. It was smooth and grassclad inside, and there were no trees
except three very tall and beautiful silver-birches that stood at the
bottom of the bowl. Two other paths led down into the dingle: from
the west and from the east.

Several Ents had already arrived. More were coming in down the
other paths, and some were now following Treebeard. As they drew
near the hobbits gazed at them. They had expected to see a number
of creatures as much like Treebeard as one hobbit is like another (at
any rate to a stranger’s eye); and they were very much surprised to
see nothing of the kind. The Ents were as different from one another
as trees from trees: some as different as one tree is from another of
the same name but quite different growth and history; and some as
different as one tree-kind from another, as birch from beech, oak
from ﬁr. There were a few older Ents, bearded and gnarled like hale
but ancient trees (though none looked as ancient as Treebeard); and
there were tall strong Ents, clean-limbed and smooth-skinned like
forest-trees in their prime; but there were no young Ents, no saplings.
Altogether there were about two dozen standing on the wide grassy
ﬂoor of the dingle, and as many more were marching in.
At ﬁrst Merry and Pippin were struck chieﬂy by the variety that
they saw: the many shapes, and colours, the differences in girth, and
height, and length of leg and arm; and in the number of toes and
ﬁngers (anything from three to nine). A few seemed more or less
related to Treebeard, and reminded them of beech-trees or oaks. But
there were other kinds. Some recalled the chestnut: brown-skinned
Ents with large splayﬁngered hands, and short thick legs. Some
recalled the ash: tall straight grey Ents with many-ﬁngered hands and
long legs; some the ﬁr (the tallest Ents), and others the birch, the
rowan, and the linden. But when the Ents all gathered round Tree-
beard, bowing their heads slightly, murmuring in their slow musical
voices, and looking long and intently at the strangers, then the hobbits
saw that they were all of the same kindred, and all had the same
eyes: not all so old or so deep as Treebeard’s, but all with the same
slow, steady, thoughtful expression, and the same green ﬂicker.
As soon as the whole company was assembled, standing in a wide
circle round Treebeard, a curious and unintelligible conversation
began. The Ents began to murmur slowly: ﬁrst one joined and then
another, until they were all chanting together in a long rising and
falling rhythm, now louder on one side of the ring, now dying away
there and rising to a great boom on the other side. Though he could
not catch or understand any of the words – he supposed the language
was Entish – Pippin found the sound very pleasant to listen to at
ﬁrst; but gradually his attention wavered. After a long time (and the
chant showed no signs of slackening) he found himself wondering,
since Entish was such an ‘unhasty’ language, whether they had yet
got further than Good Morning; and if Treebeard was to call the roll,
how many days it would take to sing all their names. ‘I wonder what
the Entish is for yes or no,’ he thought. He yawned.

Treebeard was immediately aware of him. ‘Hm, ha, hey, my
Pippin!’ he said, and the other Ents all stopped their chant. ‘You are
a hasty folk, I was forgetting; and anyway it is wearisome listening
to a speech you do not understand. You may get down now. I have
told your names to the Entmoot, and they have seen you, and they
have agreed that you are not Orcs, and that a new line shall be put
in the old lists. We have got no further yet, but that is quick work
for an Entmoot. You and Merry can stroll about in the dingle, if you
like. There is a well of good water, if you need refreshing, away
yonder in the north bank. There are still some words to speak before
the Moot really begins. I will come and see you again, and tell you
how things are going.’
He put the hobbits down. Before they walked away, they bowed
low. This feat seemed to amuse the Ents very much, to judge by the
tone of their murmurs, and the ﬂicker of their eyes; but they soon
turned back to their own business. Merry and Pippin climbed up the
path that came in from the west, and looked through the opening in
the great hedge. Long tree-clad slopes rose from the lip of the dingle,
and away beyond them, above the ﬁr-trees of the furthest ridge there
rose, sharp and white, the peak of a high mountain. Southwards to
their left they could see the forest falling away down into the grey
distance. There far away there was a pale green glimmer that Merry
guessed to be a glimpse of the plains of Rohan.
‘I wonder where Isengard is?’ said Pippin.
‘I don’t know quite where we are,’ said Merry; ‘but that peak is
probably Methedras, and as far as I can remember the ring of Isengard
lies in a fork or deep cleft at the end of the mountains. It is probably
down behind this great ridge. There seems to be a smoke or haze
over there, left of the peak, don’t you think?’
‘What is Isengard like?’ said Pippin. ‘I wonder what Ents can do
about it anyway.’
‘So do I,’ said Merry. ‘Isengard is a sort of ring of rocks or hills,
I think, with a ﬂat space inside and an island or pillar of rock in the
middle, called Orthanc. Saruman has a tower on it. There is a gate,
perhaps more than one, in the encircling wall, and I believe there is
a stream running through it; it comes out of the mountains, and
ﬂows on across the Gap of Rohan. It does not seem the sort of
place for Ents to tackle. But I have an odd feeling about these Ents:
somehow I don’t think they are quite as safe and, well, funny as they
seem. They seem slow, queer, and patient, almost sad; and yet I
believe they could be roused. If that happened, I would rather not be
on the other side.’
‘Yes!’ said Pippin. ‘I know what you mean. There might be all the

difference between an old cow sitting and thoughtfully chewing, and
a bull charging; and the change might come suddenly. I wonder if
Treebeard will rouse them. I am sure he means to try. But they don’t
like being roused. Treebeard got roused himself last night, and then
bottled it up again.’
The hobbits turned back. The voices of the Ents were still rising
and falling in their conclave. The sun had now risen high enough to
look over the high hedge: it gleamed on the tops of the birches and
lit the northward side of the dingle with a cool yellow light. There
they saw a little glittering fountain. They walked along the rim of
the great bowl at the feet of the evergreens – it was pleasant to feel
cool grass about their toes again, and not to be in a hurry – and then
they climbed down to the gushing water. They drank a little, a clean,
cold, sharp draught, and sat down on a mossy stone, watching the
patches of sun on the grass and the shadows of the sailing clouds
passing over the ﬂoor of the dingle. The murmur of the Ents went
on. It seemed a very strange and remote place, outside their world,
and far from everything that had ever happened to them. A great
longing came over them for the faces and voices of their companions,
especially for Frodo and Sam, and for Strider.
At last there came a pause in the Ent-voices; and looking up they
saw Treebeard coming towards them, with another Ent at his side.
‘Hm, hoom, here I am again,’ said Treebeard. ‘Are you getting
weary, or feeling impatient, hmm, eh? Well, I am afraid that you
must not get impatient yet. We have ﬁnished the ﬁrst stage now; but
I have still got to explain things again to those that live a long way
off, far from Isengard, and those that I could not get round to before
the Moot, and after that we shall have to decide what to do. However,
deciding what to do does not take Ents so long as going over all the
facts and events that they have to make up their minds about. Still,
it is no use denying, we shall be here a long time yet: a couple of
days very likely. So I have brought you a companion. He has an
ent-house nearby. Bregalad is his Elvish name. He says he has already
made up his mind and does not need to remain at the Moot. Hm,
hm, he is the nearest thing among us to a hasty Ent. You ought to
get on together. Good-bye!’ Treebeard turned and left them.
Bregalad stood for some time surveying the hobbits solemnly; and
they looked at him, wondering when he would show any signs of
‘hastiness’. He was tall, and seemed to be one of the younger Ents;
he had smooth shining skin on his arms and legs; his lips were ruddy,
and his hair was grey-green. He could bend and sway like a slender
tree in the wind. At last he spoke, and his voice though resonant was
higher and clearer than Treebeard’s.
‘Ha, hmm, my friends, let us go for a walk!’ he said. ‘I am Bregalad,

that is Quickbeam in your language. But it is only a nickname, of
course. They have called me that ever since I said yes to an elder Ent
before he had ﬁnished his question. Also I drink quickly, and go out
while some are still wetting their beards. Come with me!’
He reached down two shapely arms and gave a long-ﬁngered hand
to each of the hobbits. All that day they walked about, in the woods
with him, singing, and laughing; for Quickbeam often laughed. He
laughed if the sun came out from behind a cloud, he laughed if they
came upon a stream or spring: then he stooped and splashed his feet
and head with water; he laughed sometimes at some sound or whisper
in the trees. Whenever he saw a rowan-tree he halted a while with
his arms stretched out, and sang, and swayed as he sang.
At nightfall he brought them to his ent-house: nothing more than
a mossy stone set upon turves under a green bank. Rowan-trees grew
in a circle about it, and there was water (as in all ent-houses), a spring
bubbling out from the bank. They talked for a while as darkness fell
on the forest. Not far away the voices of the Entmoot could be heard
still going on; but now they seemed deeper and less leisurely, and
every now and again one great voice would rise in a high and quicken-
ing music, while all the others died away. But beside them Bregalad
spoke gently in their own tongue, almost whispering; and they learned
that he belonged to Skinbark’s people, and the country where they
had lived had been ravaged. That seemed to the hobbits quite enough
to explain his ‘hastiness’, at least in the matter of Orcs.
‘There were rowan-trees in my home,’ said Bregalad, softly and
sadly, ‘rowan-trees that took root when I was an Enting, many many
years ago in the quiet of the world. The oldest were planted by the
Ents to try and please the Entwives; but they looked at them and
smiled and said that they knew where whiter blossom and richer fruit
were growing. Yet there are no trees of all that race, the people of
the Rose, that are so beautiful to me. And these trees grew and grew,
till the shadow of each was like a green hall, and their red berries in
the autumn were a burden, and a beauty and a wonder. Birds used
to ﬂock there. I like birds, even when they chatter; and the rowan
has enough and to spare. But the birds became unfriendly and greedy
and tore at the trees, and threw the fruit down and did not eat it.
Then Orcs came with axes and cut down my trees. I came and called
them by their long names, but they did not quiver, they did not hear
or answer: they lay dead.
O Orofarne¨, Lassemista, Carnimı´rie¨!
O rowan fair, upon your hair how white the blossom lay!
O rowan mine, I saw you shine upon a summer’s day,
Your rind so bright, your leaves so light, your voice so cool and soft:

Upon your head how golden-red the crown you bore aloft!
O rowan dead, upon your head your hair is dry and grey;
Your crown is spilled, your voice is stilled for ever and a day.
O Orofarne¨, Lassemista, Carnimı´rie¨!’
The hobbits fell asleep to the sound of the soft singing of Bregalad,
that seemed to lament in many tongues the fall of trees that he had
loved.
The next day they spent also in his company, but they did not go
far from his ‘house’. Most of the time they sat silent under the shelter
of the bank; for the wind was colder, and the clouds closer and greyer;
there was little sunshine, and in the distance the voices of the Ents
at the Moot still rose and fell, sometimes loud and strong, sometimes
low and sad, sometimes quickening, sometimes slow and solemn as
a dirge. A second night came and still the Ents held conclave under
hurrying clouds and ﬁtful stars.
The third day broke, bleak and windy. At sunrise the Ents’ voices
rose to a great clamour and then died down again. As the morning
wore on the wind fell and the air grew heavy with expectancy. The
hobbits could see that Bregalad was now listening intently, although
to them, down in the dell of his ent-house, the sound of the Moot
was faint.
The afternoon came, and the sun, going west towards the moun-
tains, sent out long yellow beams between the cracks and ﬁssures of
the clouds. Suddenly they were aware that everything was very quiet;
the whole forest stood in listening silence. Of course, the Ent-voices
had stopped. What did that mean? Bregalad was standing up erect
and tense, looking back northwards towards Derndingle.
Then with a crash came a great ringing shout: ra-hoom-rah! The
trees quivered and bent as if a gust had struck them. There was
another pause, and then a marching music began like solemn drums,
and above the rolling beats and booms there welled voices singing
high and strong.
We come, we come with roll of drum: ta-runda runda runda rom!
The Ents were coming: ever nearer and louder rose their song:
We come, we come with horn and drum: ta-ru¯na ru¯na ru¯na rom!
Bregalad picked up the hobbits and strode from his house.
*
*
*

Before long they saw the marching line approaching: the Ents
were swinging along with great strides down the slope towards them.
Treebeard was at their head, and some ﬁfty followers were behind
him, two abreast, keeping step with their feet and beating time with
their hands upon their ﬂanks. As they drew near the ﬂash and ﬂicker
of their eyes could be seen.
‘Hoom, hom! Here we come with a boom, here we come at last!’
called Treebeard when he caught sight of Bregalad and the hobbits.
‘Come, join the Moot! We are off. We are off to Isengard!’
‘To Isengard!’ the Ents cried in many voices.
‘To Isengard!’
To Isengard! Though Isengard be ringed and barred with doors of
stone;
Though Isengard be strong and hard, as cold as stone and bare as
bone,
We go, we go, we go to war, to hew the stone and break the door;
For bole and bough are burning now, the furnace roars – we go to
war!
To land of gloom with tramp of doom, with roll of drum, we
come, we come;
To Isengard with doom we come!
With doom we come, with doom we come!
So they sang as they marched southwards.
Bregalad, his eyes shining, swung into the line beside Treebeard.
The old Ent now took the hobbits back, and set them on his shoulders
again, and so they rode proudly at the head of the singing company
with beating hearts and heads held high. Though they had expected
something to happen eventually, they were amazed at the change
that had come over the Ents. It seemed now as sudden as the bursting
of a ﬂood that had long been held back by a dike.
‘The Ents made up their minds rather quickly, after all, didn’t
they?’ Pippin ventured to say after some time, when for a moment
the singing paused, and only the beating of hands and feet was heard.
‘Quickly?’ said Treebeard. ‘Hoom! Yes, indeed. Quicker than I
expected. Indeed I have not seen them roused like this for many an
age. We Ents do not like being roused; and we never are roused
unless it is clear to us that our trees and our lives are in great danger.
That has not happened in this Forest since the wars of Sauron and
the Men of the Sea. It is the orc-work, the wanton hewing – ra´rum
– without even the bad excuse of feeding the ﬁres, that has so angered
us; and the treachery of a neighbour, who should have helped us.

Wizards ought to know better: they do know better. There is no
curse in Elvish, Entish, or the tongues of Men bad enough for such
treachery. Down with Saruman!’
‘Will you really break the doors of Isengard?’ asked Merry.
‘Ho, hm, well, we could, you know! You do not know, perhaps,
how strong we are. Maybe you have heard of Trolls? They are mighty
strong. But Trolls are only counterfeits, made by the Enemy in the
Great Darkness, in mockery of Ents, as Orcs were of Elves. We are
stronger than Trolls. We are made of the bones of the earth. We can
split stone like the roots of trees, only quicker, far quicker, if our
minds are roused! If we are not hewn down, or destroyed by ﬁre or
blast of sorcery, we could split Isengard into splinters and crack its
walls into rubble.’
‘But Saruman will try to stop you, won’t he?’
‘Hm, ah, yes, that is so. I have not forgotten it. Indeed I have
thought long about it. But, you see, many of the Ents are younger
than I am, by many lives of trees. They are all roused now, and their
mind is all on one thing: breaking Isengard. But they will start think-
ing again before long; they will cool down a little, when we take our
evening drink. What a thirst we shall have! But let them march now
and sing! We have a long way to go, and there is time ahead for
thought. It is something to have started.’
Treebeard marched on, singing with the others for a while. But
after a time his voice died to a murmur and fell silent again. Pippin
could see that his old brow was wrinkled and knotted. At last he
looked up, and Pippin could see a sad look in his eyes, sad but not
unhappy. There was a light in them, as if the green ﬂame had sunk
deeper into the dark wells of his thought.
‘Of course, it is likely enough, my friends,’ he said slowly, ‘likely
enough that we are going to our doom: the last march of the Ents.
But if we stayed at home and did nothing, doom would ﬁnd us
anyway, sooner or later. That thought has long been growing in our
hearts; and that is why we are marching now. It was not a hasty
resolve. Now at least the last march of the Ents may be worth a song.
Aye,’ he sighed, ‘we may help the other peoples before we pass away.
Still, I should have liked to see the songs come true about the
Entwives. I should dearly have liked to see Fimbrethil again. But
there, my friends, songs like trees bear fruit only in their own time
and their own way: and sometimes they are withered untimely.’
The Ents went striding on at a great pace. They had descended
into a long fold of the land that fell away southward; now they began
to climb up, and up, on to the high western ridge. The woods fell
away and they came to scattered groups of birch, and then to bare

slopes where only a few gaunt pine-trees grew. The sun sank behind
the dark hill-back in front. Grey dusk fell.
Pippin looked behind. The number of the Ents had grown – or
what was happening? Where the dim bare slopes that they had crossed
should lie, he thought he saw groves of trees. But they were moving!
Could it be that the trees of Fangorn were awake, and the forest was
rising, marching over the hills to war? He rubbed his eyes wondering
if sleep and shadow had deceived him; but the great grey shapes
moved steadily onward. There was a noise like wind in many
branches. The Ents were drawing near the crest of the ridge now,
and all song had ceased. Night fell, and there was silence: nothing
was to be heard save a faint quiver of the earth beneath the feet of
the Ents, and a rustle, the shade of a whisper as of many drifting
leaves. At last they stood upon the summit, and looked down into a
dark pit: the great cleft at the end of the mountains: Nan Curunı´r,
the Valley of Saruman.
‘Night lies over Isengard,’ said Treebeard.

Chapter 5
T H E  W H I T E  R I D E R
‘My very bones are chilled,’ said Gimli, ﬂapping his arms and stamp-
ing his feet. Day had come at last. At dawn the companions had
made such breakfast as they could; now in the growing light they
were getting ready to search the ground again for signs of the hobbits.
‘And do not forget that old man!’ said Gimli. ‘I should be happier
if I could see the print of a boot.’
‘Why would that make you happy?’ said Legolas.
‘Because an old man with feet that leave marks might be no more
than he seemed,’ answered the Dwarf.
‘Maybe,’ said the Elf; ‘but a heavy boot might leave no print here:
the grass is deep and springy.’
‘That would not bafﬂe a Ranger,’ said Gimli. ‘A bent blade is
enough for Aragorn to read. But I do not expect him to ﬁnd any
traces. It was an evil phantom of Saruman that we saw last night. I
am sure of it, even under the light of morning. His eyes are looking
out on us from Fangorn even now, maybe.’
‘It is likely enough,’ said Aragorn; ‘yet I am not sure. I am thinking
of the horses. You said last night, Gimli, that they were scared away.
But I did not think so. Did you hear them, Legolas? Did they sound
to you like beasts in terror?’
‘No,’ said Legolas. ‘I heard them clearly. But for the darkness and
our own fear I should have guessed that they were beasts wild with
some sudden gladness. They spoke as horses will when they meet a
friend that they have long missed.’
‘So I thought,’ said Aragorn; ‘but I cannot read the riddle, unless
they return. Come! The light is growing fast. Let us look ﬁrst and
guess later! We should begin here, near to our own camping-ground,
searching carefully all about, and working up the slope towards the
forest. To ﬁnd the hobbits is our errand, whatever we may think of
our visitor in the night. If they escaped by some chance, then they
must have hidden in the trees, or they would have been seen. If we
ﬁnd nothing between here and the eaves of the wood, then we will
make a last search upon the battle-ﬁeld and among the ashes. But
there is little hope there: the horsemen of Rohan did their work too
well.’
For some time the companions crawled and groped upon the
ground. The tree stood mournfully above them, its dry leaves now

hanging limp, and rattling in the chill easterly wind. Aragorn moved
slowly away. He came to the ashes of the watch-ﬁre near the river-
bank, and then began to retrace the ground back towards the knoll
where the battle had been fought. Suddenly he stooped and bent low
with his face almost in the grass. Then he called to the others. They
came running up.
‘Here at last we ﬁnd news!’ said Aragorn. He lifted up a broken
leaf for them to see, a large pale leaf of golden hue, now fading and
turning brown. ‘Here is a mallorn-leaf of Lo´rien, and there are small
crumbs on it, and a few more crumbs in the grass. And see! there
are some pieces of cut cord lying nearby!’
‘And here is the knife that cut them!’ said Gimli. He stooped and
drew out of a tussock, into which some heavy foot had trampled it,
a short jagged blade. The haft from which it had been snapped was
beside it. ‘It was an orc-weapon,’ he said, holding it gingerly, and
looking with disgust at the carved handle: it had been shaped like a
hideous head with squinting eyes and leering mouth.
‘Well, here is the strangest riddle that we have yet found!’
exclaimed Legolas. ‘A bound prisoner escapes both from the Orcs
and from the surrounding horsemen. He then stops, while still in the
open, and cuts his bonds with an orc-knife. But how and why? For
if his legs were tied, how did he walk? And if his arms were tied, how
did he use the knife? And if neither were tied, why did he cut the
cords at all? Being pleased with his skill, he then sat down and quietly
ate some waybread! That at least is enough to show that he was a
hobbit, without the mallorn-leaf. After that, I suppose, he turned his
arms into wings and ﬂew away singing into the trees. It should be
easy to ﬁnd him: we only need wings ourselves!’
‘There was sorcery here right enough,’ said Gimli. ‘What was that
old man doing? What have you to say, Aragorn, to the reading of
Legolas. Can you better it?’
‘Maybe, I could,’ said Aragorn, smiling. ‘There are some other
signs near at hand that you have not considered. I agree that the
prisoner was a hobbit and must have had either legs or hands free,
before he came here. I guess that it was hands, because the riddle
then becomes easier, and also because, as I read the marks, he was
carried to this point by an Orc. Blood was spilled there, a few paces
away, orc-blood. There are deep prints of hoofs all about this spot,
and signs that a heavy thing was dragged away. The Orc was slain
by horsemen, and later his body was hauled to the ﬁre. But the hobbit
was not seen: he was not ‘‘in the open’’, for it was night and he still
had his elven-cloak. He was exhausted and hungry, and it is not to
be wondered at that, when he had cut his bonds with the knife of
his fallen enemy, he rested and ate a little before he crept away. But

it is a comfort to know that he had some lembas in his pocket, even
though he ran away without gear or pack; that, perhaps, is like a
hobbit. I say he, though I hope and guess that both Merry and Pippin
were here together. There is, however, nothing to show that for
certain.’
‘And how do you suppose that either of our friends came to have
a hand free?’ asked Gimli.
‘I do not know how it happened,’ answered Aragorn. ‘Nor do I
know why an Orc was carrying them away. Not to help them to
escape, we may be sure. Nay, rather I think that I now begin to
understand a matter that has puzzled me from the beginning: why
when Boromir had fallen were the Orcs content with the capture of
Merry and Pippin? They did not seek out the rest of us, nor attack
our camp; but instead they went with all speed towards Isengard.
Did they suppose they had captured the Ring-bearer and his faithful
comrade? I think not. Their masters would not dare to give such
plain orders to Orcs, even if they knew so much themselves; they
would not speak openly to them of the Ring: they are not trusty
servants. But I think the Orcs had been commanded to capture hob-
bits, alive, at all costs. An attempt was made to slip out with the
precious prisoners before the battle. Treachery perhaps, likely enough
with such folk; some large and bold Orc may have been trying to
escape with the prize alone, for his own ends. There, that is my tale.
Others might be devised. But on this we may count in any case: one
at least of our friends escaped. It is our task to ﬁnd him and help
him before we return to Rohan. We must not be daunted by Fangorn,
since need drove him into that dark place.’
‘I do not know which daunts me more: Fangorn, or the thought
of the long road through Rohan on foot,’ said Gimli.
‘Then let us go to the forest,’ said Aragorn.
It was not long before Aragorn found fresh signs. At one point,
near the bank of the Entwash, he came upon footprints: hobbit-prints,
but too light for much to be made of them. Then again beneath
the bole of a great tree on the very edge of the wood more prints
were discovered. The earth was bare and dry, and did not reveal
much.
‘One hobbit at least stood here for a while and looked back; and
then he turned away into the forest,’ said Aragorn.
‘Then we must go in, too,’ said Gimli. ‘But I do not like the look
of this Fangorn; and we were warned against it. I wish the chase had
led anywhere else!’
‘I do not think the wood feels evil, whatever tales may say,’ said
Legolas. He stood under the eaves of the forest, stooping forward,

as if he were listening, and peering with wide eyes into the shadows.
‘No, it is not evil; or what evil is in it is far away. I catch only the
faintest echoes of dark places where the hearts of the trees are black.
There is no malice near us; but there is watchfulness, and anger.’
‘Well, it has no cause to be angry with me,’ said Gimli. ‘I have
done it no harm.’
‘That is just as well,’ said Legolas. ‘But nonetheless it has suffered
harm. There is something happening inside, or going to happen. Do
you not feel the tenseness? It takes my breath.’
‘I feel the air is stuffy,’ said the Dwarf. ‘This wood is lighter than
Mirkwood, but it is musty and shabby.’
‘It is old, very old,’ said the Elf. ‘So old that almost I feel young
again, as I have not felt since I journeyed with you children. It is old
and full of memory. I could have been happy here, if I had come in
days of peace.’
‘I dare say you could,’ snorted Gimli. ‘You are a Wood-elf, anyway,
though Elves of any kind are strange folk. Yet you comfort me. Where
you go, I will go. But keep your bow ready to hand, and I will keep
my axe loose in my belt. Not for use on trees,’ he added hastily,
looking up at the tree under which they stood. ‘I do not wish to meet
that old man at unawares without an argument ready to hand, that
is all. Let us go!’
With that the three hunters plunged into the forest of Fangorn.
Legolas and Gimli left the tracking to Aragorn. There was little for
him to see. The ﬂoor of the forest was dry and covered with a drift
of leaves; but guessing that the fugitives would stay near the water,
he returned often to the banks of the stream. So it was that he came
upon the place where Merry and Pippin had drunk and bathed their
feet. There plain for all to see were the footprints of two hobbits,
one somewhat smaller than the other.
‘This is good tidings,’ said Aragorn. ‘Yet the marks are two days
old. And it seems that at this point the hobbits left the water-
side.’
‘Then what shall we do now?’ said Gimli. ‘We cannot pursue them
through the whole fastness of Fangorn. We have come ill supplied.
If we do not ﬁnd them soon, we shall be of no use to them, except
to sit down beside them and show our friendship by starving together.’
‘If that is indeed all we can do, then we must do that,’ said Aragorn.
‘Let us go on.’
They came at length to the steep abrupt end of Treebeard’s Hill,
and looked up at the rock-wall with its rough steps leading to the
high shelf. Gleams of sun were striking through the hurrying clouds,
and the forest now looked less grey and drear.

‘Let us go up and look about us!’ said Legolas. ‘I still feel my
breath short. I should like to taste a freer air for a while.’
The companions climbed up. Aragorn came last, moving slowly:
he was scanning the steps and ledges closely.
‘I am almost sure that the hobbits have been up here,’ he said.
‘But there are other marks, very strange marks, which I do not under-
stand. I wonder if we can see anything from this ledge which will
help us to guess which way they went next?’
He stood up and looked about, but he saw nothing that was of
any use. The shelf faced southward and eastward; but only on the
east was the view open. There he could see the heads of the trees
descending in ranks towards the plain from which they had come.
‘We have journeyed a long way round,’ said Legolas. ‘We could
have all come here safe together, if we had left the Great River on
the second or third day and struck west. Few can foresee whither
their road will lead them, till they come to its end.’
‘But we did not wish to come to Fangorn,’ said Gimli.
‘Yet here we are – and nicely caught in the net,’ said Legolas.
‘Look!’
‘Look at what?’ said Gimli.
‘There in the trees.’
‘Where? I have not elf-eyes.’
‘Hush! Speak more softly! Look!’ said Legolas pointing. ‘Down in
the wood, back in the way that we have just come. It is he. Cannot
you see him, passing from tree to tree?’
‘I see, I see now!’ hissed Gimli. ‘Look, Aragorn! Did I not warn
you? There is the old man. All in dirty grey rags: that is why I could
not see him at ﬁrst.’
Aragorn looked and beheld a bent ﬁgure moving slowly. It was
not far away. It looked like an old beggar-man, walking wearily,
leaning on a rough staff. His head was bowed, and he did not look
towards them. In other lands they would have greeted him with kind
words; but now they stood silent, each feeling a strange expectancy:
something was approaching that held a hidden power – or menace.
Gimli gazed with wide eyes for a while, as step by step the ﬁgure
drew nearer. Then suddenly, unable to contain himself longer, he
burst out: ‘Your bow, Legolas! Bend it! Get ready! It is Saruman.
Do not let him speak, or put a spell upon us! Shoot ﬁrst!’
Legolas took his bow and bent it, slowly and as if some other will
resisted him. He held an arrow loosely in his hand but did not ﬁt it
to the string. Aragorn stood silent, his face was watchful and intent.
‘Why are you waiting? What is the matter with you?’ said Gimli
in a hissing whisper.
‘Legolas is right,’ said Aragorn quietly. ‘We may not shoot an old

man so, at unawares and unchallenged, whatever fear or doubt be
on us. Watch and wait!’
At that moment the old man quickened his pace and came with
surprising speed to the foot of the rock-wall. Then suddenly he looked
up, while they stood motionless looking down. There was no sound.
They could not see his face: he was hooded, and above the hood he
wore a wide-brimmed hat, so that all his features were overshadowed,
except for the end of his nose and his grey beard. Yet it seemed to
Aragorn that he caught the gleam of eyes keen and bright from within
the shadow of the hooded brows.
At last the old man broke the silence. ‘Well met indeed, my
friends,’ he said in a soft voice. ‘I wish to speak to you. Will you
come down, or shall I come up?’ Without waiting for an answer he
began to climb.
‘Now!’ cried Gimli. ‘Stop him, Legolas!’
‘Did I not say that I wished to speak to you?’ said the old man.
‘Put away that bow, Master Elf !’
The bow and arrow fell from Legolas’ hands, and his arms hung
loose at his sides.
‘And you, Master Dwarf, pray take your hand from your axe-haft,
till I am up! You will not need such arguments.’
Gimli started and then stood still as stone, staring, while the old
man sprang up the rough steps as nimbly as a goat. All weariness
seemed to have left him. As he stepped up on to the shelf there was
a gleam, too brief for certainty, a quick glint of white, as if some
garment shrouded by the grey rags had been for an instant revealed.
The intake of Gimli’s breath could be heard as a loud hiss in the
silence.
‘Well met, I say again!’ said the old man, coming towards them.
When he was a few feet away, he stood, stooping over his staff, with
his head thrust forward, peering at them from under his hood. ‘And
what may you be doing in these parts? An Elf, a Man, and a Dwarf,
all clad in Elvish fashion. No doubt there is a tale worth hearing
behind it all. Such things are not often seen here.’
‘You speak as one that knows Fangorn well,’ said Aragorn. ‘Is that
so?’
‘Not well,’ said the old man: ‘that would be the study of many
lives. But I come here now and again.’
‘Might we know your name, and then hear what it is that you have
to say to us?’ said Aragorn. ‘The morning passes, and we have an
errand that will not wait.’
‘As for what I wished to say, I have said it: What may you be

doing, and what tale can you tell of yourselves? As for my name!’ He
broke off, laughing long and softly. Aragorn felt a shudder run
through him at the sound, a strange cold thrill; and yet it was not
fear or terror that he felt: rather it was like the sudden bite of a keen
air, or the slap of a cold rain that wakes an uneasy sleeper.
‘My name!’ said the old man again. ‘Have you not guessed it
already? You have heard it before, I think. Yes, you have heard it
before. But come now, what of your tale?’
The three companions stood silent and made no answer.
‘There are some who would begin to doubt whether your errand
is ﬁt to tell,’ said the old man. ‘Happily I know something of it. You
are tracking the footsteps of two young hobbits, I believe. Yes, hob-
bits. Don’t stare, as if you had never heard the strange name before.
You have, and so have I. Well, they climbed up here the day before
yesterday; and they met someone that they did not expect. Does that
comfort you? And now you would like to know where they were
taken? Well, well, maybe I can give you some news about that. But
why are we standing? Your errand, you see, is no longer as urgent
as you thought. Let us sit down and be more at ease.’
The old man turned away and went towards a heap of fallen stones
and rock at the foot of the cliff behind. Immediately, as if a spell had
been removed, the others relaxed and stirred. Gimli’s hand went at
once to his axe-haft. Aragorn drew his sword. Legolas picked up his
bow.
The old man took no notice, but stooped and sat himself on a
low ﬂat stone. Then his grey cloak drew apart, and they saw, beyond
doubt, that he was clothed beneath all in white.
‘Saruman!’ cried Gimli, springing towards him with axe in hand.
‘Speak! Tell us where you have hidden our friends! What have you
done with them? Speak, or I will make a dint in your hat that even
a wizard will ﬁnd it hard to deal with!’
The old man was too quick for him. He sprang to his feet and
leaped to the top of a large rock. There he stood, grown suddenly
tall, towering above them. His hood and his grey rags were ﬂung
away. His white garments shone. He lifted up his staff, and Gimli’s
axe leaped from his grasp and fell ringing on the ground. The sword
of Aragorn, stiff in his motionless hand, blazed with a sudden ﬁre.
Legolas gave a great shout and shot an arrow high into the air: it
vanished in a ﬂash of ﬂame.
‘Mithrandir!’ he cried. ‘Mithrandir!’
‘Well met, I say to you again, Legolas!’ said the old man.
They all gazed at him. His hair was white as snow in the sunshine;
and gleaming white was his robe; the eyes under his deep brows were

bright, piercing as the rays of the sun; power was in his hand. Between
wonder, joy, and fear they stood and found no words to say.
At last Aragorn stirred. ‘Gandalf !’ he said. ‘Beyond all hope you
return to us in our need! What veil was over my sight? Gandalf !’
Gimli said nothing, but sank to his knees, shading his eyes.
‘Gandalf,’ the old man repeated, as if recalling from old memory
a long disused word. ‘Yes, that was the name. I was Gandalf.’
He stepped down from the rock, and picking up his grey cloak
wrapped it about him: it seemed as if the sun had been shining, but
now was hid in cloud again. ‘Yes, you may still call me Gandalf,’ he
said, and the voice was the voice of their old friend and guide. ‘Get
up, my good Gimli! No blame to you, and no harm done to me.
Indeed my friends, none of you have any weapon that could hurt
me. Be merry! We meet again. At the turn of the tide. The great
storm is coming, but the tide has turned.’
He laid his hand on Gimli’s head, and the Dwarf looked up and
laughed suddenly. ‘Gandalf !’ he said. ‘But you are all in white!’
‘Yes, I am white now,’ said Gandalf. ‘Indeed I am Saruman, one
might almost say, Saruman as he should have been. But come now,
tell me of yourselves! I have passed through ﬁre and deep water,
since we parted. I have forgotten much that I thought I knew, and
learned again much that I had forgotten. I can see many things far
off, but many things that are close at hand I cannot see. Tell me of
yourselves!’
‘What do you wish to know?’ said Aragorn. ‘All that has happened
since we parted on the bridge would be a long tale. Will you not ﬁrst
give us news of the hobbits? Did you ﬁnd them, and are they safe?’
‘No, I did not ﬁnd them,’ said Gandalf. ‘There was a darkness
over the valleys of the Emyn Muil, and I did not know of their
captivity, until the eagle told me.’
‘The eagle!’ said Legolas. ‘I have seen an eagle high and far off:
the last time was four days ago, above the Emyn Muil.’
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf, ‘that was Gwaihir the Windlord, who rescued
me from Orthanc. I sent him before me to watch the River and gather
tidings. His sight is keen, but he cannot see all that passes under hill
and tree. Some things he has seen, and others I have seen myself.
The Ring now has passed beyond my help, or the help of any of the
Company that set out from Rivendell. Very nearly it was revealed to
the Enemy, but it escaped. I had some part in that: for I sat in a high
place, and I strove with the Dark Tower; and the Shadow passed.
Then I was weary, very weary; and I walked long in dark thought.’
‘Then you know about Frodo!’ said Gimli. ‘How do things go
with him?’

‘I cannot say. He was saved from a great peril, but many lie before
him still. He resolved to go alone to Mordor, and he set out: that is
all that I can say.’
‘Not alone,’ said Legolas. ‘We think that Sam went with him.’
‘Did he!’ said Gandalf, and there was a gleam in his eye and a
smile on his face. ‘Did he indeed? It is news to me, yet it does not
surprise me. Good! Very good! You lighten my heart. You must tell
me more. Now sit by me and tell me the tale of your journey.’
The companions sat on the ground at his feet, and Aragorn took
up the tale. For a long while Gandalf said nothing, and he asked no
questions. His hands were spread upon his knees, and his eyes were
closed. At last when Aragorn spoke of the death of Boromir and of
his last journey upon the Great River, the old man sighed.
‘You have not said all that you know or guess, Aragorn my friend,’
he said quietly. ‘Poor Boromir! I could not see what happened to
him. It was a sore trial for such a man: a warrior, and a lord of men.
Galadriel told me that he was in peril. But he escaped in the end. I
am glad. It was not in vain that the young hobbits came with us, if
only for Boromir’s sake. But that is not the only part they have to
play. They were brought to Fangorn, and their coming was like the
falling of small stones that starts an avalanche in the mountains. Even
as we talk here, I hear the ﬁrst rumblings. Saruman had best not be
caught away from home when the dam bursts!’
‘In one thing you have not changed, dear friend,’ said Aragorn:
‘you still speak in riddles.’
‘What? In riddles?’ said Gandalf. ‘No! For I was talking aloud to
myself. A habit of the old: they choose the wisest person present to
speak to; the long explanations needed by the young are wearying.’
He laughed, but the sound now seemed warm and kindly as a gleam
of sunshine.
‘I am no longer young even in the reckoning of Men of the Ancient
Houses,’ said Aragorn. ‘Will you not open your mind more clearly
to me?’
‘What then shall I say?’ said Gandalf, and paused for a while in
thought. ‘This in brief is how I see things at the moment, if you wish
to have a piece of my mind as plain as possible. The Enemy, of
course, has long known that the Ring is abroad, and that it is borne
by a hobbit. He knows now the number of our Company that set
out from Rivendell, and the kind of each of us. But he does not yet
perceive our purpose clearly. He supposes that we were all going to
Minas Tirith; for that is what he would himself have done in our
place. And according to his wisdom it would have been a heavy stroke
against his power. Indeed he is in great fear, not knowing what mighty

one may suddenly appear, wielding the Ring, and assailing him with
war, seeking to cast him down and take his place. That we should
wish to cast him down and have no one in his place is not a thought
that occurs to his mind. That we should try to destroy the Ring itself
has not yet entered into his darkest dream. In which no doubt you
will see our good fortune and our hope. For imagining war he has
let loose war, believing that he has no time to waste; for he that
strikes the ﬁrst blow, if he strikes it hard enough, may need to strike
no more. So the forces that he has long been preparing he is now
setting in motion, sooner than he intended. Wise fool. For if he had
used all his power to guard Mordor, so that none could enter, and
bent all his guile to the hunting of the Ring, then indeed hope would
have faded: neither Ring nor bearer could long have eluded him. But
now his eye gazes abroad rather than near at home; and mostly he
looks towards Minas Tirith. Very soon now his strength will fall upon
it like a storm.
‘For already he knows that the messengers that he sent to waylay
the Company have failed again. They have not found the Ring.
Neither have they brought away any hobbits as hostages. Had they
done even so much as that, it would have been a heavy blow to us,
and it might have been fatal. But let us not darken our hearts by
imagining the trial of their gentle loyalty in the Dark Tower. For the
Enemy has failed – so far. Thanks to Saruman.’
‘Then is not Saruman a traitor?’ said Gimli.
‘Indeed yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘Doubly. And is not that strange? Noth-
ing that we have endured of late has seemed so grievous as the treason
of Isengard. Even reckoned as a lord and captain Saruman has grown
very strong. He threatens the Men of Rohan and draws off their help
from Minas Tirith, even as the main blow is approaching from the
East. Yet a treacherous weapon is ever a danger to the hand. Saruman
also had a mind to capture the Ring, for himself, or at least to snare
some hobbits for his evil purposes. So between them our enemies
have contrived only to bring Merry and Pippin with marvellous speed,
and in the nick of time, to Fangorn, where otherwise they would
never have come at all!
‘Also they have ﬁlled themselves with new doubts that disturb
their plans. No tidings of the battle will come to Mordor, thanks to
the horsemen of Rohan; but the Dark Lord knows that two hobbits
were taken in the Emyn Muil and borne away towards Isengard
against the will of his own servants. He now has Isengard to fear as
well as Minas Tirith. If Minas Tirith falls, it will go ill with Saruman.’
‘It is a pity that our friends lie in between,’ said Gimli. ‘If no land
divided Isengard and Mordor, then they could ﬁght while we watched
and waited.’

‘The victor would emerge stronger than either, and free from
doubt,’ said Gandalf. ‘But Isengard cannot ﬁght Mordor, unless
Saruman ﬁrst obtains the Ring. That he will never do now. He does
not yet know his peril. There is much that he does not know. He
was so eager to lay his hands on his prey that he could not wait at
home, and he came forth to meet and to spy on his messengers. But
he came too late, for once, and the battle was over and beyond his
help before he reached these parts. He did not remain here long. I
look into his mind and I see his doubt. He has no woodcraft. He
believes that the horsemen slew and burned all upon the ﬁeld of
battle; but he does not know whether the Orcs were bringing any
prisoners or not. And he does not know of the quarrel between his
servants and the Orcs of Mordor; nor does he know of the Winged
Messenger.’
‘The Winged Messenger!’ cried Legolas. ‘I shot at him with the
bow of Galadriel above Sarn Gebir, and I felled him from the sky.
He ﬁlled us all with fear. What new terror is this?’
‘One that you cannot slay with arrows,’ said Gandalf. ‘You only
slew his steed. It was a good deed; but the Rider was soon horsed
again. For he was a Nazguˆl, one of the Nine, who ride now upon
winged steeds. Soon their terror will overshadow the last armies of
our friends, cutting off the sun. But they have not yet been allowed
to cross the River, and Saruman does not know of this new shape in
which the Ringwraiths have been clad. His thought is ever on the
Ring. Was it present in the battle? Was it found? What if The´oden,
Lord of the Mark, should come by it and learn of its power? That is
the danger that he sees, and he has ﬂed back to Isengard to double
and treble his assault on Rohan. And all the time there is another
danger, close at hand, which he does not see, busy with his ﬁery
thoughts. He has forgotten Treebeard.’
‘Now you speak to yourself again,’ said Aragorn with a smile.
‘Treebeard is not known to me. And I have guessed part of Saruman’s
double treachery; yet I do not see in what way the coming of two
hobbits to Fangorn has served, save to give us a long and fruitless
chase.’
‘Wait a minute!’ cried Gimli. ‘There is another thing that I should
like to know ﬁrst. Was it you, Gandalf, or Saruman that we saw last
night?’
‘You certainly did not see me,’ answered Gandalf, ‘therefore I
must guess that you saw Saruman. Evidently we look so much alike
that your desire to make an incurable dent in my hat must be
excused.’
‘Good, good!’ said Gimli. ‘I am glad that it was not you.’
Gandalf laughed again. ‘Yes, my good Dwarf,’ he said, ‘it is a

comfort not to be mistaken at all points. Do I not know it only too
well! But, of course, I never blamed you for your welcome of me.
How could I do so, who have so often counselled my friends to
suspect even their own hands when dealing with the Enemy. Bless
you, Gimli, son of Glo´ in! Maybe you will see us both together one
day and judge between us!’
‘But the hobbits!’ Legolas broke in. ‘We have come far to seek
them, and you seem to know where they are. Where are they now?’
‘With Treebeard and the Ents,’ said Gandalf.
‘The Ents!’ exclaimed Aragorn. ‘Then there is truth in the old
legends about the dwellers in the deep forests and the giant shepherds
of the trees? Are there still Ents in the world? I thought they were
only a memory of ancient days, if indeed they were ever more than
a legend of Rohan.’
‘A legend of Rohan!’ cried Legolas. ‘Nay, every Elf in Wilderland
has sung songs of the old Onodrim and their long sorrow. Yet even
among us they are only a memory. If I were to meet one still walking
in this world, then indeed I should feel young again! But Treebeard:
that is only a rendering of Fangorn into the Common Speech; yet
you seem to speak of a person. Who is this Treebeard?’
‘Ah! now you are asking much,’ said Gandalf. ‘The little that I
know of his long slow story would make a tale for which we have no
time now. Treebeard is Fangorn, the guardian of the forest; he is the
oldest of the Ents, the oldest living thing that still walks beneath the
Sun upon this Middle-earth. I hope indeed, Legolas, that you may
yet meet him. Merry and Pippin have been fortunate: they met him
here, even where we sit. For he came here two days ago and bore
them away to his dwelling far off by the roots of the mountains. He
often comes here, especially when his mind is uneasy, and rumours
of the world outside trouble him. I saw him four days ago striding
among the trees, and I think he saw me, for he paused; but I did not
speak, for I was heavy with thought, and weary after my struggle with
the Eye of Mordor; and he did not speak either, nor call my name.’
‘Perhaps he also thought that you were Saruman,’ said Gimli.
‘But you speak of him as if he was a friend. I thought Fangorn was
dangerous.’
‘Dangerous!’ cried Gandalf. ‘And so am I, very dangerous: more
dangerous than anything you will ever meet, unless you are brought
alive before the seat of the Dark Lord. And Aragorn is dangerous,
and Legolas is dangerous. You are beset with dangers, Gimli son of
Glo´ in; for you are dangerous yourself, in your own fashion. Certainly
the forest of Fangorn is perilous – not least to those that are too
ready with their axes; and Fangorn himself, he is perilous too; yet
he is wise and kindly nonetheless. But now his long slow wrath is

brimming over, and all the forest is ﬁlled with it. The coming of the
hobbits and the tidings that they brought have spilled it: it will soon
be running like a ﬂood; but its tide is turned against Saruman and
the axes of Isengard. A thing is about to happen which has not
happened since the Elder Days: the Ents are going to wake up and
ﬁnd that they are strong.’
‘What will they do?’ asked Legolas in astonishment.
‘I do not know,’ said Gandalf. ‘I do not think they know them-
selves. I wonder.’ He fell silent, his head bowed in thought.
The others looked at him. A gleam of sun through ﬂeeting clouds
fell on his hands, which lay now upturned on his lap: they seemed
to be ﬁlled with light as a cup is with water. At last he looked up
and gazed straight at the sun.
‘The morning is wearing away,’ he said. ‘Soon we must go.’
‘Do we go to ﬁnd our friends and to see Treebeard?’ asked Aragorn.
‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘That is not the road that you must take. I
have spoken words of hope. But only of hope. Hope is not victory.
War is upon us and all our friends, a war in which only the use of
the Ring could give us surety of victory. It ﬁlls me with great sorrow
and great fear: for much shall be destroyed and all may be lost. I am
Gandalf, Gandalf the White, but Black is mightier still.’
He rose and gazed out eastward, shading his eyes, as if he saw
things far away that none of them could see. Then he shook his head.
‘No,’ he said in a soft voice, ‘it has gone beyond our reach. Of that
at least let us be glad. We can no longer be tempted to use the Ring.
We must go down to face a peril near despair, yet that deadly peril
is removed.’
He turned. ‘Come, Aragorn son of Arathorn!’ he said. ‘Do not
regret your choice in the valley of the Emyn Muil, nor call it a vain
pursuit. You chose amid doubts the path that seemed right: the choice
was just, and it has been rewarded. For so we have met in time, who
otherwise might have met too late. But the quest of your companions
is over. Your next journey is marked by your given word. You must
go to Edoras and seek out The´oden in his hall. For you are needed.
The light of Andu´ril must now be uncovered in the battle for which
it has so long waited. There is war in Rohan, and worse evil: it goes
ill with The´oden.’
‘Then are we not to see the merry young hobbits again?’ said
Legolas.
‘I did not say so,’ said Gandalf. ‘Who knows? Have patience. Go
where you must go, and hope! To Edoras! I go thither also.’
‘It is a long way for a man to walk, young or old,’ said Aragorn.
‘I fear the battle will be over long ere I come there.’

‘We shall see, we shall see,’ said Gandalf. ‘Will you come now
with me?’
‘Yes, we will set out together,’ said Aragorn. ‘But I do not doubt
that you will come there before me, if you wish.’ He rose and looked
long at Gandalf. The others gazed at them in silence as they stood
there facing one another. The grey ﬁgure of the Man, Aragorn son
of Arathorn, was tall, and stern as stone, his hand upon the hilt of
his sword; he looked as if some king out of the mists of the sea had
stepped upon the shores of lesser men. Before him stooped the old
ﬁgure, white, shining now as if with some light kindled within, bent,
laden with years, but holding a power beyond the strength of kings.
‘Do I not say truly, Gandalf,’ said Aragorn at last, ‘that you could
go whithersoever you wished quicker than I? And this I also say: you
are our captain and our banner. The Dark Lord has Nine. But we
have One, mightier than they: the White Rider. He has passed
through the ﬁre and the abyss, and they shall fear him. We will go
where he leads.’
‘Yes, together we will follow you,’ said Legolas. ‘But ﬁrst, it would
ease my heart, Gandalf, to hear what befell you in Moria. Will you
not tell us? Can you not stay even to tell your friends how you were
delivered?’
‘I have stayed already too long,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Time is short.
But if there were a year to spend, I would not tell you all.’
‘Then tell us what you will, and time allows!’ said Gimli. ‘Come,
Gandalf, tell us how you fared with the Balrog!’
‘Name him not!’ said Gandalf, and for a moment it seemed that
a cloud of pain passed over his face, and he sat silent, looking old as
death. ‘Long time I fell,’ he said at last, slowly, as if thinking back
with difﬁculty. ‘Long I fell, and he fell with me. His ﬁre was about
me. I was burned. Then we plunged into the deep water and all was
dark. Cold it was as the tide of death: almost it froze my heart.’
‘Deep is the abyss that is spanned by Durin’s Bridge, and none
has measured it,’ said Gimli.
‘Yet it has a bottom, beyond light and knowledge,’ said Gandalf.
‘Thither I came at last, to the uttermost foundations of stone. He
was with me still. His ﬁre was quenched, but now he was a thing of
slime, stronger than a strangling snake.
‘We fought far under the living earth, where time is not counted.
Ever he clutched me, and ever I hewed him, till at last he ﬂed into
dark tunnels. They were not made by Durin’s folk, Gimli son of
Glo´ in. Far, far below the deepest delvings of the Dwarves, the world
is gnawed by nameless things. Even Sauron knows them not. They
are older than he. Now I have walked there, but I will bring no report

to darken the light of day. In that despair my enemy was my only
hope, and I pursued him, clutching at his heel. Thus he brought me
back at last to the secret ways of Khazad-duˆm: too well he knew
them all. Ever up now we went, until we came to the Endless Stair.’
‘Long has that been lost,’ said Gimli. ‘Many have said that it was
never made save in legend, but others say that it was destroyed.’
‘It was made, and it had not been destroyed,’ said Gandalf. ‘From
the lowest dungeon to the highest peak it climbed, ascending in
unbroken spiral in many thousand steps, until it issued at last in
Durin’s Tower carved in the living rock of Zirakzigil, the pinnacle of
the Silvertine.
‘There upon Celebdil was a lonely window in the snow, and before
it lay a narrow space, a dizzy eyrie above the mists of the world. The
sun shone ﬁercely there, but all below was wrapped in cloud. Out
he sprang, and even as I came behind, he burst into new ﬂame. There
was none to see, or perhaps in after ages songs would still be sung
of the Battle of the Peak.’ Suddenly Gandalf laughed. ‘But what
would they say in song? Those that looked up from afar thought that
the mountain was crowned with storm. Thunder they heard, and
lightning, they said, smote upon Celebdil, and leaped back broken
into tongues of ﬁre. Is not that enough? A great smoke rose about
us, vapour and steam. Ice fell like rain. I threw down my enemy, and
he fell from the high place and broke the mountain-side where he
smote it in his ruin. Then darkness took me, and I strayed out of
thought and time, and I wandered far on roads that I will not tell.
‘Naked I was sent back – for a brief time, until my task is done.
And naked I lay upon the mountain-top. The tower behind was
crumbled into dust, the window gone; the ruined stair was choked
with burned and broken stone. I was alone, forgotten, without escape
upon the hard horn of the world. There I lay staring upward, while
the stars wheeled over, and each day was as long as a life-age of the
earth. Faint to my ears came the gathered rumour of all lands: the
springing and the dying, the song and the weeping, and the slow
everlasting groan of over-burdened stone. And so at the last Gwaihir
the Windlord found me again, and he took me up and bore me away.
‘ ‘‘Ever am I fated to be your burden, friend at need,’’ I said.
‘ ‘‘A burden you have been,’’ he answered, ‘‘but not so now. Light
as a swan’s feather in my claw you are. The Sun shines through you.
Indeed I do not think you need me any more: were I to let you fall,
you would ﬂoat upon the wind.’’
‘ ‘‘Do not let me fall!’’ I gasped, for I felt life in me again. ‘‘Bear
me to Lothlo´ rien!’’
‘ ‘‘That indeed is the command of the Lady Galadriel who sent
me to look for you,’’ he answered.

‘Thus it was that I came to Caras Galadhon and found you but
lately gone. I tarried there in the ageless time of that land where days
bring healing not decay. Healing I found, and I was clothed in white.
Counsel I gave and counsel took. Thence by strange roads I came,
and messages I bring to some of you. To Aragorn I was bidden to
say this:
Where now are the Du´nedain, Elessar, Elessar?
Why do thy kinsfolk wander afar?
Near is the hour when the Lost should come forth,
And the Grey Company ride from the North.
But dark is the path appointed for thee:
The Dead watch the road that leads to the Sea.
To Legolas she sent this word:
Legolas Greenleaf long under tree
In joy thou hast lived. Beware of the Sea!
If thou hearest the cry of the gull on the shore,
Thy heart shall then rest in the forest no more.’
Gandalf fell silent and shut his eyes.
‘Then she sent me no message?’ said Gimli and bent his head.
‘Dark are her words,’ said Legolas, ‘and little do they mean to
those that receive them.’
‘That is no comfort,’ said Gimli.
‘What then?’ said Legolas. ‘Would you have her speak openly to
you of your death?’
‘Yes, if she had naught else to say.’
‘What is that?’ said Gandalf, opening his eyes. ‘Yes, I think I can
guess what her words may mean. Your pardon, Gimli! I was pon-
dering the messages once again. But indeed she sent words to you,
and neither dark nor sad.
‘ ‘‘To Gimli son of Glo´in,’’ she said, ‘‘give his Lady’s greeting.
Lockbearer, wherever thou goest my thought goes with thee. But
have a care to lay thine axe to the right tree!’’ ’
‘In happy hour you have returned to us, Gandalf,’ cried the Dwarf,
capering as he sang loudly in the strange dwarf-tongue. ‘Come,
come!’ he shouted, swinging his axe. ‘Since Gandalf ’s head is now
sacred, let us ﬁnd one that it is right to cleave!’
‘That will not be far to seek,’ said Gandalf, rising from his seat.
‘Come! We have spent all the time that is allowed to a meeting of
parted friends. Now there is need of haste.’
*
*
*

He wrapped himself again in his old tattered cloak, and led the
way. Following him they descended quickly from the high shelf and
made their way back through the forest, down the bank of the
Entwash. They spoke no more words, until they stood again upon
the grass beyond the eaves of Fangorn. There was no sign of their
horses to be seen.
‘They have not returned,’ said Legolas. ‘It will be a weary walk!’
‘I shall not walk. Time presses,’ said Gandalf. Then lifting up his
head he gave a long whistle. So clear and piercing was the note that
the others stood amazed to hear such a sound come from those old
bearded lips. Three times he whistled; and then faint and far off it
seemed to them that they heard the whinny of a horse borne up from
the plains upon the eastern wind. They waited wondering. Before
long there came the sound of hoofs, at ﬁrst hardly more than a tremor
of the ground perceptible only to Aragorn as he lay upon the grass,
then growing steadily louder and clearer to a quick beat.
‘There is more than one horse coming,’ said Aragorn.
‘Certainly,’ said Gandalf. ‘We are too great a burden for one.’
‘There are three,’ said Legolas, gazing out over the plain. ‘See
how they run! There is Hasufel, and there is my friend Arod beside
him! But there is another that strides ahead: a very great horse. I
have not seen his like before.’
‘Nor will you again,’ said Gandalf. ‘That is Shadowfax. He is the
chief of the Mearas, lords of horses, and not even The´oden, King of
Rohan, has ever looked on a better. Does he not shine like silver,
and run as smoothly as a swift stream? He has come for me: the
horse of the White Rider. We are going to battle together.’
Even as the old wizard spoke, the great horse came striding up
the slope towards them; his coat was glistening and his mane ﬂowing
in the wind of his speed. The two others followed, now far behind.
As soon as Shadowfax saw Gandalf, he checked his pace and whin-
nied loudly; then trotting gently forward he stooped his proud head
and nuzzled his great nostrils against the old man’s neck.
Gandalf caressed him. ‘It is a long way from Rivendell, my friend,’
he said; ‘but you are wise and swift and come at need. Far let us ride
now together, and part not in this world again!’
Soon the other horses came up and stood quietly by, as if awaiting
orders. ‘We go at once to Meduseld, the hall of your master,
The´oden,’ said Gandalf, addressing them gravely. They bowed their
heads. ‘Time presses, so with your leave, my friends, we will ride.
We beg you to use all the speed that you can. Hasufel shall bear
Aragorn and Arod Legolas. I will set Gimli before me, and by his
leave Shadowfax shall bear us both. We will wait now only to drink
a little.’

‘Now I understand a part of last night’s riddle,’ said Legolas as
he sprang lightly upon Arod’s back. ‘Whether they ﬂed at ﬁrst in
fear, or not, our horses met Shadowfax, their chieftain, and greeted
him with joy. Did you know that he was at hand, Gandalf ?’
‘Yes, I knew,’ said the wizard. ‘I bent my thought upon him,
bidding him to make haste; for yesterday he was far away in the south
of this land. Swiftly may he bear me back again!’
Gandalf spoke now to Shadowfax, and the horse set off at a good
pace, yet not beyond the measure of the others. After a little while
he turned suddenly, and choosing a place where the banks were
lower, he waded the river, and then led them away due south into a
ﬂat land, treeless and wide. The wind went like grey waves through
the endless miles of grass. There was no sign of road or track, but
Shadowfax did not stay or falter.
‘He is steering a straight course now for the halls of The´oden
under the slopes of the White Mountains,’ said Gandalf. ‘It will be
quicker so. The ground is ﬁrmer in the Eastemnet, where the chief
northward track lies, across the river, but Shadowfax knows the way
through every fen and hollow.’
For many hours they rode on through the meads and riverlands.
Often the grass was so high that it reached above the knees of the
riders, and their steeds seemed to be swimming in a grey-green sea.
They came upon many hidden pools, and broad acres of sedge waving
above wet and treacherous bogs; but Shadowfax found the way, and
the other horses followed in his swath. Slowly the sun fell from the
sky down into the West. Looking out over the great plain, far away
the riders saw it for a moment like a red ﬁre sinking into the grass.
Low upon the edge of sight shoulders of the mountains glinted red
upon either side. A smoke seemed to rise up and darken the sun’s
disc to the hue of blood, as if it had kindled the grass as it passed
down under the rim of earth.
‘There lies the Gap of Rohan,’ said Gandalf. ‘It is now almost due
west of us. That way lies Isengard.’
‘I see a great smoke,’ said Legolas. ‘What may that be?’
‘Battle and war!’ said Gandalf. ‘Ride on!’

Chapter 6
T H E  K I N G  O F  T H E
G O L D E N  H A L L
They rode on through sunset, and slow dusk, and gathering night.
When at last they halted and dismounted, even Aragorn was stiff and
weary. Gandalf only allowed them a few hours’ rest. Legolas and
Gimli slept, and Aragorn lay ﬂat, stretched upon his back; but Gan-
dalf stood, leaning on his staff, gazing into the darkness, east and
west. All was silent, and there was no sign or sound of living thing.
The night was barred with long clouds, ﬂeeting on a chill wind, when
they arose again. Under the cold moon they went on once more, as
swift as by the light of day.
Hours passed and still they rode on. Gimli nodded and would
have fallen from his seat, if Gandalf had not clutched and shaken him.
Hasufel and Arod, weary but proud, followed their tireless leader, a
grey shadow before them hardly to be seen. The miles went by. The
waxing moon sank into the cloudy West.
A bitter chill came into the air. Slowly in the East the dark faded
to a cold grey. Red shafts of light leapt above the black walls of the
Emyn Muil far away upon their left. Dawn came clear and bright; a
wind swept across their path, rushing through the bent grasses. Sud-
denly Shadowfax stood still and neighed. Gandalf pointed ahead.
‘Look!’ he cried, and they lifted their tired eyes. Before them stood
the mountains of the South: white-tipped and streaked with black.
The grass-lands rolled against the hills that clustered at their feet,
and ﬂowed up into many valleys still dim and dark, untouched by the
light of dawn, winding their way into the heart of the great mountains.
Immediately before the travellers the widest of these glens opened
like a long gulf among the hills. Far inward they glimpsed a tumbled
mountain-mass with one tall peak; at the mouth of the vale there
stood like a sentinel a lonely height. About its feet there ﬂowed, as
a thread of silver, the stream that issued from the dale; upon its brow
they caught, still far away, a glint in the rising sun, a glimmer of gold.
‘Speak, Legolas!’ said Gandalf. ‘Tell us what you see there before
us!’
Legolas gazed ahead, shading his eyes from the level shafts of the
new-risen sun. ‘I see a white stream that comes down from the snows,’
he said. ‘Where it issues from the shadow of the vale a green hill

rises upon the east. A dike and mighty wall and thorny fence encircle
it. Within there rise the roofs of houses; and in the midst, set upon
a green terrace, there stands aloft a great hall of Men. And it seems
to my eyes that it is thatched with gold. The light of it shines far
over the land. Golden, too, are the posts of its doors. There men in
bright mail stand; but all else within the courts are yet asleep.’
‘Edoras those courts are called,’ said Gandalf, ‘and Meduseld is
that golden hall. There dwells The´oden son of Thengel, King of the
Mark of Rohan. We are come with the rising of the day. Now the
road lies plain to see before us. But we must ride more warily; for
war is abroad, and the Rohirrim, the Horse-lords, do not sleep, even
if it seem so from afar. Draw no weapon, speak no haughty word, I
counsel you all, until we are come before The´oden’s seat.’
The morning was bright and clear about them, and birds were
singing, when the travellers came to the stream. It ran down swiftly
into the plain, and beyond the feet of the hills turned across their
path in a wide bend, ﬂowing away east to feed the Entwash far off
in its reed-choked beds. The land was green: in the wet meads and
along the grassy borders of the stream grew many willow-trees.
Already in this southern land they were blushing red at their ﬁnger-
tips, feeling the approach of spring. Over the stream there was a ford
between low banks much trampled by the passage of horses. The
travellers passed over and came upon a wide rutted track leading
towards the uplands.
At the foot of the walled hill the way ran under the shadow of
many mounds, high and green. Upon their western sides the grass
was white as with a drifted snow: small ﬂowers sprang there like
countless stars amid the turf.
‘Look!’ said Gandalf. ‘How fair are the bright eyes in the grass!
Evermind they are called, simbelmyne¨ in this land of Men, for they
blossom in all the seasons of the year, and grow where dead men
rest. Behold! we are come to the great barrows where the sires of
The´oden sleep.’
‘Seven mounds upon the left, and nine upon the right,’ said Aragorn.
‘Many long lives of men it is since the golden hall was built.’
‘Five hundred times have the red leaves fallen in Mirkwood in my
home since then,’ said Legolas, ‘and but a little while does that seem
to us.’
‘But to the Riders of the Mark it seems so long ago,’ said Aragorn,
‘that the raising of this house is but a memory of song, and the years
before are lost in the mist of time. Now they call this land their home,
their own, and their speech is sundered from their northern kin.’
Then he began to chant softly in a slow tongue unknown to the

Elf and Dwarf; yet they listened, for there was a strong music in it.
‘That, I guess, is the language of the Rohirrim,’ said Legolas; ‘for
it is like to this land itself; rich and rolling in part, and else hard and
stern as the mountains. But I cannot guess what it means, save that
it is laden with the sadness of Mortal Men.’
‘It runs thus in the Common Speech,’ said Aragorn, ‘as near as I
can make it.
Where now the horse and the rider? Where is the horn that was
blowing?
Where is the helm and the hauberk, and the bright hair ﬂowing?
Where is the hand on the harpstring, and the red ﬁre glowing?
Where is the spring and the harvest and the tall corn growing?
They have passed like rain on the mountain, like a wind in the
meadow;
The days have gone down in the West behind the hills into shadow.
Who shall gather the smoke of the dead wood burning,
Or behold the ﬂowing years from the Sea returning?
Thus spoke a forgotten poet long ago in Rohan, recalling how tall
and fair was Eorl the Young, who rode down out of the North; and
there were wings upon the feet of his steed, Felaro´f, father of horses.
So men still sing in the evening.’
With these words the travellers passed the silent mounds. Follow-
ing the winding way up the green shoulders of the hills, they came
at last to the wide wind-swept walls and the gates of Edoras.
There sat many men in bright mail, who sprang at once to their
feet and barred the way with spears. ‘Stay, strangers here unknown!’
they cried in the tongue of the Riddermark, demanding the names
and errand of the strangers. Wonder was in their eyes but little friend-
liness; and they looked darkly upon Gandalf.
‘Well do I understand your speech,’ he answered in the same
language; ‘yet few strangers do so. Why then do you not speak in
the Common Tongue, as is the custom in the West, if you wish to
be answered?’
‘It is the will of The´oden King that none should enter his gates,
save those who know our tongue and are our friends,’ replied one of
the guards. ‘None are welcome here in days of war but our own folk,
and those that come from Mundburg in the land of Gondor. Who
are you that come heedless over the plain thus strangely clad, riding
horses like to our own horses? Long have we kept guard here, and
we have watched you from afar. Never have we seen other riders so
strange, nor any horse more proud than is one of these that bear you.
He is one of the Mearas, unless our eyes are cheated by some spell.

Say, are you not a wizard, some spy from Saruman, or phantoms of
his craft? Speak now and be swift!’
‘We are no phantoms,’ said Aragorn, ‘nor do your eyes cheat you.
For indeed these are your own horses that we ride, as you knew well
ere you asked, I guess. But seldom does thief ride home to the stable.
Here are Hasufel and Arod, that Eomer, the Third Marshal of the
´
Mark, lent to us, only two days ago. We bring them back now, even
´
as we promised him. Has not Eomer then returned and given warning
of our coming?’
A troubled look came into the guard’s eyes. ‘Of Eomer I have
´
naught to say,’ he answered. ‘If what you tell me is truth, then doubt-
less The´oden will have heard of it. Maybe your coming was not
wholly unlooked-for. It is but two nights ago that Wormtongue came
to us and said that by the will of The´oden no stranger should pass
these gates.’
‘Wormtongue?’ said Gandalf, looking sharply at the guard. ‘Say
no more! My errand is not to Wormtongue, but to the Lord of the
Mark himself. I am in haste. Will you not go or send to say that we
are come?’ His eyes glinted under his deep brows as he bent his gaze
upon the man.
‘Yes, I will go,’ he answered slowly. ‘But what names shall I report?
And what shall I say of you? Old and weary you seem now, and yet
you are fell and grim beneath, I deem.’
‘Well do you see and speak,’ said the wizard. ‘For I am Gandalf.
I have returned. And behold! I too bring back a horse. Here is
Shadowfax the Great, whom no other hand can tame. And here
beside me is Aragorn son of Arathorn, the heir of Kings, and it is to
Mundburg that he goes. Here also are Legolas the Elf and Gimli the
Dwarf, our comrades. Go now and say to your master that we are
at his gates and would have speech with him, if he will permit us to
come into his hall.’
‘Strange names you give indeed! But I will report them as you
bid, and learn my master’s will,’ said the guard. ‘Wait here a little
while, and I will bring you such answer as seems good to him. Do
not hope too much! These are dark days.’ He went swiftly away,
leaving the strangers in the watchful keeping of his comrades.
After some time he returned. ‘Follow me!’ he said. ‘The´oden gives
you leave to enter; but any weapon that you bear, be it only a staff,
you must leave on the threshold. The doorwardens will keep them.’
The dark gates were swung open. The travellers entered, walking
in ﬁle behind their guide. They found a broad path, paved with hewn
stones, now winding upward, now climbing in short ﬂights of well-laid
steps. Many houses built of wood and many dark doors they passed.

Beside the way in a stone channel a stream of clear water ﬂowed,
sparkling and chattering. At length they came to the crown of the
hill. There stood a high platform above a green terrace, at the foot
of which a bright spring gushed from a stone carved in the likeness
of a horse’s head; beneath was a wide basin from which the water
spilled and fed the falling stream. Up the green terrace went a stair
of stone, high and broad, and on either side of the topmost step were
stone-hewn seats. There sat other guards, with drawn swords laid
upon their knees. Their golden hair was braided on their shoulders;
the sun was blazoned upon their green shields, their long corslets
were burnished bright, and when they rose taller they seemed than
mortal men.
‘There are the doors before you,’ said the guide. ‘I must return
now to my duty at the gate. Farewell! And may the Lord of the Mark
be gracious to you!’
He turned and went swiftly back down the road. The others
climbed the long stair under the eyes of the tall watchmen. Silent
they stood now above and spoke no word, until Gandalf stepped out
upon the paved terrace at the stair’s head. Then suddenly with clear
voices they spoke a courteous greeting in their own tongue.
‘Hail, comers from afar!’ they said, and they turned the hilts of
their swords towards the travellers in token of peace. Green gems
ﬂashed in the sunlight. Then one of the guards stepped forward and
spoke in the Common Speech.
‘I am the Doorward of The´oden,’ he said. ‘Ha´ma is my name.
Here I must bid you lay aside your weapons before you enter.’
Then Legolas gave into his hand his silver-hafted knife, his quiver,
and his bow. ‘Keep these well,’ he said, ‘for they come from the
Golden Wood and the Lady of Lothlo´ rien gave them to me.’
Wonder came into the man’s eyes, and he laid the weapons hastily
by the wall, as if he feared to handle them. ‘No man will touch them,
I promise you,’ he said.
Aragorn stood a while hesitating. ‘It is not my will,’ he said, ‘to put
aside my sword or to deliver Andu´ril to the hand of any other man.’
‘It is the will of The´oden,’ said Ha´ma.
‘It is not clear to me that the will of The´oden son of Thengel,
even though he be lord of the Mark, should prevail over the will of
Aragorn son of Arathorn, Elendil’s heir of Gondor.’
‘This is the house of The´oden, not of Aragorn, even were he King
of Gondor in the seat of Denethor,’ said Ha´ma, stepping swiftly
before the doors and barring the way. His sword was now in his hand
and the point towards the strangers.
‘This is idle talk,’ said Gandalf. ‘Needless is The´oden’s demand,

but it is useless to refuse. A king will have his way in his own hall,
be it folly or wisdom.’
‘Truly,’ said Aragorn. ‘And I would do as the master of the house
bade me, were this only a woodman’s cot, if I bore now any sword
but Andu´ril.’
‘Whatever its name may be,’ said Ha´ma, ‘here you shall lay it, if
you would not ﬁght alone against all the men in Edoras.’
‘Not alone!’ said Gimli, ﬁngering the blade of his axe, and looking
darkly up at the guard, as if he were a young tree that Gimli had a
mind to fell. ‘Not alone!’
‘Come, come!’ said Gandalf. ‘We are all friends here. Or should
be; for the laughter of Mordor will be our only reward, if we quarrel.
My errand is pressing. Here at least is my sword, goodman Ha´ma.
Keep it well. Glamdring it is called, for the Elves made it long ago.
Now let me pass. Come, Aragorn!’
Slowly Aragorn unbuckled his belt and himself set his sword
upright against the wall. ‘Here I set it,’ he said; ‘but I command you
not to touch it, nor to permit any other to lay hand on it. In this
Elvish sheath dwells the Blade that was Broken and has been made
again. Telchar ﬁrst wrought it in the deeps of time. Death shall come
to any man that draws Elendil’s sword save Elendil’s heir.’
The guard stepped back and looked with amazement on Aragorn.
‘It seems that you are come on the wings of song out of the forgotten
days,’ he said. ‘It shall be, lord, as you command.’
‘Well,’ said Gimli, ‘if it has Andu´ril to keep it company, my axe
may stay here, too, without shame’; and he laid it on the ﬂoor. ‘Now
then, if all is as you wish, let us go and speak with your master.’
The guard still hesitated. ‘Your staff,’ he said to Gandalf. ‘Forgive
me, but that too must be left at the doors.’
‘Foolishness!’ said Gandalf. ‘Prudence is one thing, but discour-
tesy is another. I am old. If I may not lean on my stick as I go, then
I will sit out here, until it pleases The´oden to hobble out himself to
speak with me.’
Aragorn laughed. ‘Every man has something too dear to trust to
another. But would you part an old man from his support? Come,
will you not let us enter?’
‘The staff in the hand of a wizard may be more than a prop for
age,’ said Ha´ma. He looked hard at the ash-staff on which Gandalf
leaned. ‘Yet in doubt a man of worth will trust to his own wisdom.
I believe you are friends and folk worthy of honour, who have no
evil purpose. You may go in.’
The guards now lifted the heavy bars of the doors and swung
them slowly inwards grumbling on their great hinges. The travellers

entered. Inside it seemed dark and warm after the clear air upon the
hill. The hall was long and wide and ﬁlled with shadows and half
lights; mighty pillars upheld its lofty roof. But here and there bright
sunbeams fell in glimmering shafts from the eastern windows, high
under the deep eaves. Through the louver in the roof, above the thin
wisps of issuing smoke, the sky showed pale and blue. As their eyes
changed, the travellers perceived that the ﬂoor was paved with stones
of many hues; branching runes and strange devices intertwined
beneath their feet. They saw now that the pillars were richly carved,
gleaming dully with gold and half-seen colours. Many woven cloths
were hung upon the walls, and over their wide spaces marched ﬁgures
of ancient legend, some dim with years, some darkling in the shade.
But upon one form the sunlight fell: a young man upon a white horse.
He was blowing a great horn, and his yellow hair was ﬂying in the
wind. The horse’s head was lifted, and its nostrils were wide and red
as it neighed, smelling battle afar. Foaming water, green and white,
rushed and curled about its knees.
‘Behold Eorl the Young!’ said Aragorn. ‘Thus he rode out of the
North to the Battle of the Field of Celebrant.’
Now the four companions went forward, past the clear wood-ﬁre
burning upon the long hearth in the midst of the hall. Then they
halted. At the far end of the house, beyond the hearth and facing
north towards the doors, was a dais with three steps; and in the
middle of the dais was a great gilded chair. Upon it sat a man so
bent with age that he seemed almost a dwarf; but his white hair was
long and thick and fell in great braids from beneath a thin golden
circlet set upon his brow. In the centre upon his forehead shone a
single white diamond. His beard was laid like snow upon his knees;
but his eyes still burned with a bright light, glinting as he gazed at
the strangers. Behind his chair stood a woman clad in white. At his
feet upon the steps sat a wizened ﬁgure of a man, with a pale wise
face and heavy-lidded eyes.
There was a silence. The old man did not move in his chair. At
length Gandalf spoke. ‘Hail, The´oden son of Thengel! I have
returned. For behold! the storm comes, and now all friends should
gather together, lest each singly be destroyed.’
Slowly the old man rose to his feet, leaning heavily upon a short
black staff with a handle of white bone; and now the strangers saw
that, bent though he was, he was still tall and must in youth have
been high and proud indeed.
‘I greet you,’ he said, ‘and maybe you look for welcome. But truth
to tell your welcome is doubtful here, Master Gandalf. You have ever
been a herald of woe. Troubles follow you like crows, and ever the

oftener the worse. I will not deceive you: when I heard that Shadowfax
had come back riderless, I rejoiced at the return of the horse, but
still more at the lack of the rider; and when Eomer brought the tidings
´
that you had gone at last to your long home, I did not mourn. But
news from afar is seldom sooth. Here you come again! And with you
come evils worse than before, as might be expected. Why should I
welcome you, Gandalf Stormcrow? Tell me that.’ Slowly he sat down
again in his chair.
‘You speak justly, lord,’ said the pale man sitting upon the steps
of the dais. ‘It is not yet ﬁve days since the bitter tidings came that
The´odred your son was slain upon the West Marches: your right-
hand, Second Marshal of the Mark. In Eomer there is little trust.
´
Few men would be left to guard your walls, if he had been allowed
to rule. And even now we learn from Gondor that the Dark Lord is
stirring in the East. Such is the hour in which this wanderer chooses
to return. Why indeed should we welcome you, Master Stormcrow?
La´thspell I name you, Ill-news; and ill news is an ill guest they say.’
He laughed grimly, as he lifted his heavy lids for a moment and gazed
on the strangers with dark eyes.
‘You are held wise, my friend Wormtongue, and are doubtless a
great support to your master,’ answered Gandalf in a soft voice. ‘Yet
in two ways may a man come with evil tidings. He may be a worker
of evil; or he may be such as leaves well alone, and comes only to
bring aid in time of need.’
‘That is so,’ said Wormtongue; ‘but there is a third kind: pickers
of bones, meddlers in other men’s sorrows, carrion-fowl that grow
fat on war. What aid have you ever brought, Stormcrow? And what
aid do you bring now? It was aid from us that you sought last time
that you were here. Then my lord bade you choose any horse that
you would and be gone; and to the wonder of all you took Shadowfax
in your insolence. My lord was sorely grieved; yet to some it seemed
that to speed you from the land the price was not too great. I guess
that it is likely to turn out the same once more: you will seek aid
rather than render it. Do you bring men? Do you bring horses,
swords, spears? That I would call aid; that is our present need. But
who are these that follow at your tail? Three ragged wanderers in
grey, and you yourself the most beggar-like of the four!’
‘The courtesy of your hall is somewhat lessened of late, The´oden
son of Thengel,’ said Gandalf. ‘Has not the messenger from your
gate reported the names of my companions? Seldom has any lord of
Rohan received three such guests. Weapons they have laid at your
doors that are worth many a mortal man, even the mightiest. Grey
is their raiment, for the Elves clad them, and thus they have passed
through the shadow of great perils to your hall.’

´
‘Then it is true, as Eomer reported, that you are in league with
the Sorceress of the Golden Wood?’ said Wormtongue. ‘It is not to
be wondered at: webs of deceit were ever woven in Dwimordene.’
Gimli strode a pace forward, but felt suddenly the hand of Gandalf
clutch him by the shoulder, and he halted, standing stiff as stone.
In Dwimordene, in Lo´rien
Seldom have walked the feet of Men,
Few mortal eyes have seen the light
That lies there ever, long and bright.
Galadriel! Galadriel!
Clear is the water of your well;
White is the star in your white hand;
Unmarred, unstained is leaf and land
In Dwimordene, in Lo´rien
More fair than thoughts of Mortal Men.
Thus Gandalf softly sang, and then suddenly he changed. Casting
his tattered cloak aside, he stood up and leaned no longer on his
staff; and he spoke in a clear cold voice.
‘The wise speak only of what they know, Grı´ma son of Ga´lmo´d.
A witless worm have you become. Therefore be silent, and keep your
forked tongue behind your teeth. I have not passed through ﬁre and
death to bandy crooked words with a serving-man till the lightning
falls.’
He raised his staff. There was a roll of thunder. The sunlight was
blotted out from the eastern windows; the whole hall became sud-
denly dark as night. The ﬁre faded to sullen embers. Only Gandalf
could be seen, standing white and tall before the blackened hearth.
In the gloom they heard the hiss of Wormtongue’s voice: ‘Did I
not counsel you, lord, to forbid his staff ? That fool, Ha´ma, has
betrayed us!’ There was a ﬂash as if lightning had cloven the roof.
Then all was silent. Wormtongue sprawled on his face.
‘Now The´oden son of Thengel, will you hearken to me?’ said
Gandalf. ‘Do you ask for help?’ He lifted his staff and pointed to a
high window. There the darkness seemed to clear, and through the
opening could be seen, high and far, a patch of shining sky. ‘Not all
is dark. Take courage, Lord of the Mark; for better help you will not
ﬁnd. No counsel have I to give to those that despair. Yet counsel I
could give, and words I could speak to you. Will you hear them?
They are not for all ears. I bid you come out before your doors and
look abroad. Too long have you sat in shadows and trusted to twisted
tales and crooked promptings.’

Slowly The´oden left his chair. A faint light grew in the hall again.
The woman hastened to the king’s side, taking his arm, and with
faltering steps the old man came down from the dais and paced softly
through the hall. Wormtongue remained lying on the ﬂoor. They
came to the doors and Gandalf knocked.
‘Open!’ he cried. ‘The Lord of the Mark comes forth!’
The doors rolled back and a keen air came whistling in. A wind
was blowing on the hill.
‘Send your guards down to the stairs’ foot,’ said Gandalf. ‘And
you, lady, leave him a while with me. I will care for him.’
´
‘Go, Eowyn sister-daughter!’ said the old king. ‘The time for fear
is past.’
The woman turned and went slowly into the house. As she passed
the doors she turned and looked back. Grave and thoughtful was her
glance, as she looked on the king with cool pity in her eyes. Very fair
was her face, and her long hair was like a river of gold. Slender and
tall she was in her white robe girt with silver; but strong she seemed
and stern as steel, a daughter of kings. Thus Aragorn for the ﬁrst
time in the full light of day beheld Eowyn, Lady of Rohan, and
´
thought her fair, fair and cold, like a morning of pale spring that is
not yet come to womanhood. And she now was suddenly aware of
him: tall heir of kings, wise with many winters, greycloaked, hiding
a power that yet she felt. For a moment still as stone she stood, then
turning swiftly she was gone.
‘Now, lord,’ said Gandalf, ‘look out upon your land! Breathe the
free air again!’
From the porch upon the top of the high terrace they could see
beyond the stream the green ﬁelds of Rohan fading into distant grey.
Curtains of wind-blown rain were slanting down. The sky above and
to the west was still dark with thunder, and lightning far away
ﬂickered among the tops of hidden hills. But the wind had shifted
to the north, and already the storm that had come out of the East
was receding, rolling away southward to the sea. Suddenly through
a rent in the clouds behind them a shaft of sun stabbed down. The
falling showers gleamed like silver, and far away the river glittered
like a shimmering glass.
‘It is not so dark here,’ said The´oden.
‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘Nor does age lie so heavily on your shoulders
as some would have you think. Cast aside your prop!’
From the king’s hand the black staff fell clattering on the stones.
He drew himself up, slowly, as a man that is stiff from long bending
over some dull toil. Now tall and straight he stood, and his eyes were
blue as he looked into the opening sky.
‘Dark have been my dreams of late,’ he said, ‘but I feel as one

new-awakened. I would now that you had come before, Gandalf.
For I fear that already you have come too late, only to see the last
days of my house. Not long now shall stand the high hall which
Brego son of Eorl built. Fire shall devour the high seat. What is to
be done?’
‘Much,’ said Gandalf. ‘But ﬁrst send for Eomer. Do I not guess
´
rightly that you hold him prisoner, by the counsel of Grı´ma, of him
that all save you name the Wormtongue?’
‘It is true,’ said The´oden. ‘He had rebelled against my commands,
and threatened death to Grı´ma in my hall.’
‘A man may love you and yet not love Wormtongue or his coun-
sels,’ said Gandalf.
‘That may be. I will do as you ask. Call Ha´ma to me. Since he
proved untrusty as a doorward, let him become an errand-runner.
The guilty shall bring the guilty to judgement,’ said The´oden, and
his voice was grim, yet he looked at Gandalf and smiled and as he
did so many lines of care were smoothed away and did not return.
When Ha´ma had been summoned and had gone, Gandalf led
The´oden to a stone seat, and then sat himself before the king upon
the topmost stair. Aragorn and his companions stood nearby.
‘There is no time to tell all that you should hear,’ said Gandalf.
‘Yet if my hope is not cheated, a time will come ere long when I can
speak more fully. Behold! you are come into a peril greater even than
the wit of Wormtongue could weave into your dreams. But see! you
dream no longer. You live. Gondor and Rohan do not stand alone.
The enemy is strong beyond our reckoning, yet we have a hope at
which he has not guessed.’
Quickly now Gandalf spoke. His voice was low and secret, and
none save the king heard what he said. But ever as he spoke the light
shone brighter in The´oden’s eye, and at the last he rose from his seat
to his full height, and Gandalf beside him, and together they looked
out from the high place towards the East.
‘Verily,’ said Gandalf, now in a loud voice, keen and clear, ‘that
way lies our hope, where sits our greatest fear. Doom hangs still on
a thread. Yet hope there is still, if we can but stand unconquered for
a little while.’
The others too now turned their eyes eastward. Over the sundering
leagues of land, far away they gazed to the edge of sight, and hope
and fear bore their thoughts still on, beyond dark mountains to the
Land of Shadow. Where now was the Ring-bearer? How thin indeed
was the thread upon which doom still hung! It seemed to Legolas,
as he strained his farseeing eyes, that he caught a glint of white: far
away perchance the sun twinkled on a pinnacle of the Tower of

Guard. And further still, endlessly remote and yet a present threat,
there was a tiny tongue of ﬂame.
Slowly The´oden sat down again, as if weariness still struggled to
master him against the will of Gandalf. He turned and looked at his
great house. ‘Alas!’ he said, ‘that these evil days should be mine, and
should come in my old age instead of that peace which I have earned.
Alas for Boromir the brave! The young perish and the old linger,
withering.’ He clutched his knees with his wrinkled hands.
‘Your ﬁngers would remember their old strength better, if they
grasped a sword-hilt,’ said Gandalf.
The´oden rose and put his hand to his side; but no sword hung at
his belt. ‘Where has Grı´ma stowed it?’ he muttered under his breath.
‘Take this, dear lord!’ said a clear voice. ‘It was ever at your
service.’ Two men had come softly up the stair and stood now a few
steps from the top. Eomer was there. No helm was on his head, no
´
mail was on his breast, but in his hand he held a drawn sword; and
as he knelt he offered the hilt to his master.
‘How comes this?’ said The´oden sternly. He turned towards
Eomer, and the men looked in wonder at him, standing now proud
´
and erect. Where was the old man whom they had left crouching in
his chair or leaning on his stick?
‘It is my doing, lord,’ said Ha´ma, trembling. ‘I understood that
´Eomer was to be set free. Such joy was in my heart that maybe I
have erred. Yet, since he was free again, and he a Marshal of the
Mark, I brought him his sword as he bade me.’
´
‘To lay at your feet, my lord,’ said Eomer.
´
For a moment of silence The´oden stood looking down at Eomer
as he knelt still before him. Neither moved.
‘Will you not take the sword?’ said Gandalf.
Slowly The´oden stretched forth his hand. As his ﬁngers took the
hilt, it seemed to the watchers that ﬁrmness and strength returned
to his thin arm. Suddenly he lifted the blade and swung it shimmering
and whistling in the air. Then he gave a great cry. His voice rang
clear as he chanted in the tongue of Rohan a call to arms.
Arise now, arise, Riders of The´oden!
Dire deeds awake, dark is it eastward.
Let horse be bridled, horn be sounded!
Forth Eorlingas!
The guards, thinking that they were summoned, sprang up the
stair. They looked at their lord in amazement, and then as one man
they drew their swords and laid them at his feet. ‘Command us!’ they
said.

´
‘Westu The´oden ha´l!’ cried Eomer. ‘It is a joy to us to see you
return into your own. Never again shall it be said, Gandalf, that you
come only with grief !’
´
‘Take back your sword, Eomer, sister-son!’ said the king. ‘Go,
Ha´ma, and seek my own sword! Grı´ma has it in his keeping. Bring
him to me also. Now, Gandalf, you said that you had counsel to
give, if I would hear it. What is your counsel?’
‘You have yourself already taken it,’ answered Gandalf. ‘To put
your trust in Eomer, rather than in a man of crooked mind. To cast
´
aside regret and fear. To do the deed at hand. Every man that can
´
ride should be sent west at once, as Eomer counselled you: we must
ﬁrst destroy the threat of Saruman, while we have time. If we fail,
we fall. If we succeed – then we will face the next task. Meanwhile
your people that are left, the women and the children and the old,
should ﬂy to the refuges that you have in the mountains. Were they
not prepared against just such an evil day as this? Let them take
provision, but delay not, nor burden themselves with treasures, great
or small. It is their lives that are at stake.’
‘This counsel seems good to me now,’ said The´oden. ‘Let all my
folk get ready! But you my guests – truly you said, Gandalf, that the
courtesy of my hall is lessened. You have ridden through the night,
and the morning wears away. You have had neither sleep nor food.
A guest-house shall be made ready: there you shall sleep, when you
have eaten.’
‘Nay, lord,’ said Aragorn. ‘There is no rest yet for the weary. The
men of Rohan must ride forth today, and we will ride with them,
axe, sword, and bow. We did not bring them to rest against your
wall, Lord of the Mark. And I promised Eomer that my sword and
´
his should be drawn together.’
´
‘Now indeed there is hope of victory!’ said Eomer.
‘Hope, yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘But Isengard is strong. And other perils
draw ever nearer. Do not delay, The´oden, when we are gone. Lead
your people swiftly to the Hold of Dunharrow in the hills!’
‘Nay, Gandalf !’ said the king. ‘You do not know your own skill
in healing. It shall not be so. I myself will go to war, to fall in the
front of the battle, if it must be. Thus shall I sleep better.’
‘Then even the defeat of Rohan will be glorious in song,’ said
Aragorn. The armed men that stood near clashed their weapons,
crying: ‘The Lord of the Mark will ride! Forth Eorlingas!’
‘But your people must not be both unarmed and shepherdless,’
said Gandalf. ‘Who shall guide them and govern them in your place?’
‘I will take thought for that ere I go,’ answered The´oden. ‘Here
comes my counsellor.’
*
*
*

At that moment Ha´ma came again from the hall. Behind him
cringing between two other men, came Grı´ma the Wormtongue. His
face was very white. His eyes blinked in the sunlight. Ha´ma knelt
and presented to The´oden a long sword in a scabbard clasped with
gold and set with green gems.
‘Here, lord, is Herugrim, your ancient blade,’ he said. ‘It was
found in his chest. Loth was he to render up the keys. Many other
things are there which men have missed.’
‘You lie,’ said Wormtongue. ‘And this sword your master himself
gave into my keeping.’
‘And he now requires it of you again,’ said The´oden. ‘Does that
displease you?’
‘Assuredly not, lord,’ said Wormtongue. ‘I care for you and yours
as best I may. But do not weary yourself, or tax too heavily your
strength. Let others deal with these irksome guests. Your meat is
about to be set on the board. Will you not go to it?’
‘I will,’ said The´oden. ‘And let food for my guests be set on the
board beside me. The host rides today. Send the heralds forth! Let
them summon all who dwell nigh! Every man and strong lad able to
bear arms, all who have horses, let them be ready in the saddle at
the gate ere the second hour from noon!’
‘Dear lord!’ cried Wormtongue. ‘It is as I feared. This wizard has
bewitched you. Are none to be left to defend the Golden Hall of
your fathers, and all your treasure? None to guard the Lord of the
Mark?’
‘If this is bewitchment,’ said The´oden, ‘it seems to me more whole-
some than your whisperings. Your leechcraft ere long would have
had me walking on all fours like a beast. No, not one shall be left,
not even Grı´ma. Grı´ma shall ride too. Go! You have yet time to clean
the rust from your sword.’
‘Mercy, lord!’ whined Wormtongue, grovelling on the ground.
‘Have pity on one worn out in your service. Send me not from your
side! I at least will stand by you when all others have gone. Do not
send your faithful Grı´ma away!’
‘You have my pity,’ said The´oden. ‘And I do not send you from
my side. I go myself to war with my men. I bid you come with me
and prove your faith.’
Wormtongue looked from face to face. In his eyes was the hunted
look of a beast seeking some gap in the ring of his enemies. He licked
his lips with a long pale tongue. ‘Such a resolve might be expected
from a lord of the House of Eorl, old though he be,’ he said. ‘But
those who truly love him would spare his failing years. Yet I see that
I come too late. Others, whom the death of my lord would perhaps
grieve less, have already persuaded him. If I cannot undo their

work, hear me at least in this, lord! One who knows your mind and
honours your commands should be left in Edoras. Appoint a faithful
steward. Let your counsellor Grı´ma keep all things till your return –
and I pray that we may see it, though no wise man will deem it
hopeful.’
Eomer laughed. ‘And if that plea does not excuse you from war,
´
most noble Wormtongue,’ he said, ‘what ofﬁce of less honour would
you accept? To carry a sack of meal up into the mountains – if any
man would trust you with it?’
‘Nay, Eomer, you do not fully understand the mind of Master
´
Wormtongue,’ said Gandalf, turning his piercing glance upon him.
‘He is bold and cunning. Even now he plays a game with peril and
wins a throw. Hours of my precious time he has wasted already.
Down, snake!’ he said suddenly in a terrible voice. ‘Down on your
belly! How long is it since Saruman bought you? What was the
promised price? When all the men were dead, you were to pick your
share of the treasure, and take the woman you desire? Too long have
you watched her under your eyelids and haunted her steps.’
Eomer grasped his sword. ‘That I knew already,’ he muttered.
´
‘For that reason I would have slain him before, forgetting the law of
the hall. But there are other reasons.’ He stepped forward, but
Gandalf stayed him with his hand.
´‘Eowyn is safe now,’ he said. ‘But you, Wormtongue, you have
done what you could for your true master. Some reward you have
earned at least. Yet Saruman is apt to overlook his bargains. I should
advise you to go quickly and remind him, lest he forget your faithful
service.’
‘You lie,’ said Wormtongue.
‘That word comes too oft and easy from your lips,’ said Gandalf.
‘I do not lie. See, The´oden, here is a snake! With safety you cannot
take it with you, nor can you leave it behind. To slay it would be
just. But it was not always as it now is. Once it was a man, and did
you service in its fashion. Give him a horse and let him go at once,
wherever he chooses. By his choice you shall judge him.’
‘Do you hear this, Wormtongue?’ said The´oden. ‘This is your
choice: to ride with me to war, and let us see in battle whether you
are true; or to go now, whither you will. But then, if ever we meet
again, I shall not be merciful.’
Slowly Wormtongue rose. He looked at them with half-closed eyes.
Last of all he scanned The´oden’s face and opened his mouth as if to
speak. Then suddenly he drew himself up. His hands worked. His
eyes glittered. Such malice was in them that men stepped back from
him. He bared his teeth; and then with a hissing breath he spat before
the king’s feet, and darting to one side, he ﬂed down the stair.

‘After him!’ said The´oden. ‘See that he does no harm to any, but
do not hurt him or hinder him. Give him a horse, if he wishes it.’
‘And if any will bear him,’ said Eomer.
´
One of the guards ran down the stair. Another went to the well
at the foot of the terrace and in his helm drew water. With it he
washed clean the stones that Wormtongue had deﬁled.
‘Now my guests, come!’ said The´oden. ‘Come and take such
refreshment as haste allows.’
They passed back into the great house. Already they heard below
them in the town the heralds crying and the war-horns blowing. For
the king was to ride forth as soon as the men of the town and those
dwelling near could be armed and assembled.
´
At the king’s board sat Eomer and the four guests, and there also
´
waiting upon the king was the lady Eowyn. They ate and drank
swiftly. The others were silent while The´oden questioned Gandalf
concerning Saruman.
‘How far back his treachery goes, who can guess?’ said Gandalf.
‘He was not always evil. Once I do not doubt that he was the friend
of Rohan; and even when his heart grew colder, he found you useful
still. But for long now he has plotted your ruin, wearing the mask of
friendship, until he was ready. In those years Wormtongue’s task was
easy, and all that you did was swiftly known in Isengard; for your land
was open, and strangers came and went. And ever Wormtongue’s
whispering was in your ears, poisoning your thought, chilling your
heart, weakening your limbs, while others watched and could do
nothing, for your will was in his keeping.
‘But when I escaped and warned you, then the mask was torn, for
those who would see. After that Wormtongue played dangerously,
always seeking to delay you, to prevent your full strength being gath-
ered. He was crafty: dulling men’s wariness, or working on their fears,
as served the occasion. Do you not remember how eagerly he urged
that no man should be spared on a wildgoose chase northward, when
the immediate peril was westward? He persuaded you to forbid Eomer
´
´
to pursue the raiding Orcs. If Eomer had not deﬁed Wormtongue’s
voice speaking with your mouth, those Orcs would have reached
Isengard by now, bearing a great prize. Not indeed that prize which
Saruman desires above all else, but at the least two members of my
Company, sharers of a secret hope, of which even to you, lord, I
cannot yet speak openly. Dare you think of what they might now be
suffering, or what Saruman might now have learned to our
destruction?’
‘I owe much to Eomer,’ said The´oden. ‘Faithful heart may have
´
froward tongue.’

‘Say also,’ said Gandalf, ‘that to crooked eyes truth may wear a
wry face.’
‘Indeed my eyes were almost blind,’ said The´oden. ‘Most of all I
owe to you, my guest. Once again you have come in time. I would
give you a gift ere we go, at your own choosing. You have only to
name aught that is mine. I reserve now only my sword!’
‘Whether I came in time or not is yet to be seen,’ said Gandalf.
‘But as for your gift, lord, I will choose one that will ﬁt my need:
swift and sure. Give me Shadowfax! He was only lent before, if loan
we may call it. But now I shall ride him into great hazard, setting
silver against black: I would not risk anything that is not my own.
And already there is a bond of love between us.’
‘You choose well,’ said The´oden; ‘and I give him now gladly. Yet
it is a great gift. There is none like to Shadowfax. In him one of the
mighty steeds of old has returned. None such shall return again. And
to you my other guests I will offer such things as may be found in
my armoury. Swords you do not need, but there are helms and coats
of mail of cunning work, gifts to my fathers out of Gondor. Choose
from these ere we go, and may they serve you well!’
Now men came bearing raiment of war from the king’s hoard, and
they arrayed Aragorn and Legolas in shining mail. Helms too they
chose, and round shields: their bosses were overlaid with gold and
set with gems, green and red and white. Gandalf took no armour;
and Gimli needed no coat of rings, even if one had been found to
match his stature, for there was no hauberk in the hoards of Edoras
of better make than his short corslet forged beneath the Mountain
in the North. But he chose a cap of iron and leather that ﬁtted well
upon his round head; and a small shield he also took. It bore the
running horse, white upon green, that was the emblem of the House
of Eorl.
‘May it keep you well!’ said The´oden. ‘It was made for me in
Thengel’s day, while still I was a boy.’
Gimli bowed. ‘I am proud, Lord of the Mark, to bear your device,’
he said. ‘Indeed sooner would I bear a horse than be borne by one.
I love my feet better. But, maybe, I shall come yet where I can stand
and ﬁght.’
‘It may well be so,’ said The´oden.
´
The king now rose, and at once Eowyn came forward bearing
wine. ‘Ferthu The´oden ha´l!’ she said. ‘Receive now this cup and drink
in happy hour. Health be with thee at thy going and coming!’
The´oden drank from the cup, and she then proffered it to the
guests. As she stood before Aragorn she paused suddenly and looked
upon him, and her eyes were shining. And he looked down upon her

fair face and smiled; but as he took the cup, his hand met hers, and
he knew that she trembled at the touch. ‘Hail Aragorn son of
Arathorn!’ she said. ‘Hail Lady of Rohan!’ he answered, but his face
now was troubled and he did not smile.
When they had all drunk, the king went down the hall to the doors.
There the guards awaited him, and heralds stood, and all the lords
and chiefs were gathered together that remained in Edoras or dwelt
nearby.
‘Behold! I go forth, and it seems like to be my last riding,’ said
´
The´oden. ‘I have no child. The´odred my son is slain. I name Eomer
my sister-son to be my heir. If neither of us return, then choose a
new lord as you will. But to some one I must now entrust my people
that I leave behind, to rule them in my place. Which of you will stay?’
No man spoke.
‘Is there none whom you would name? In whom do my people
trust?’
‘In the House of Eorl,’ answered Ha´ma.
‘But Eomer I cannot spare, nor would he stay,’ said the king; ‘and
´
he is the last of that House.’
´
‘I said not Eomer,’ answered Ha´ma. ‘And he is not the last. There
is Eowyn, daughter of Eomund, his sister. She is fearless and high-
´
´
hearted. All love her. Let her be as lord to the Eorlingas, while we
are gone.’
‘It shall be so,’ said The´oden. ‘Let the heralds announce to the
folk that the Lady Eowyn will lead them!’
´
´
Then the king sat upon a seat before his doors, and Eowyn knelt
before him and received from him a sword and a fair corslet. ‘Farewell
sister-daughter!’ he said. ‘Dark is the hour, yet maybe we shall return
to the Golden Hall. But in Dunharrow the people may long defend
themselves, and if the battle go ill, thither will come all who escape.’
‘Speak not so!’ she answered. ‘A year shall I endure for every day
that passes until your return.’ But as she spoke her eyes went to
Aragorn who stood nearby.
‘The king shall come again,’ he said. ‘Fear not! Not West but East
does our doom await us.’
The king now went down the stair with Gandalf beside him. The
others followed. Aragorn looked back as they passed towards the
´
gate. Alone Eowyn stood before the doors of the house at the stair’s
head; the sword was set upright before her, and her hands were laid
upon the hilt. She was clad now in mail and shone like silver in the
sun.
Gimli walked with Legolas, his axe on his shoulder. ‘Well, at last
we set off !’ he said. ‘Men need many words before deeds. My axe is

restless in my hands. Though I doubt not that these Rohirrim are
fell-handed when they come to it. Nonetheless this is not the warfare
that suits me. How shall I come to the battle? I wish I could walk
and not bump like a sack at Gandalf ’s saddlebow.’
‘A safer seat than many, I guess,’ said Legolas. ‘Yet doubtless
Gandalf will gladly put you down on your feet when blows begin; or
Shadowfax himself. An axe is no weapon for a rider.’
‘And a Dwarf is no horseman. It is orc-necks I would hew, not
shave the scalps of Men,’ said Gimli, patting the haft of his axe.
At the gate they found a great host of men, old and young, all
ready in the saddle. More than a thousand were there mustered.
Their spears were like a springing wood. Loudly and joyously they
shouted as The´oden came forth. Some held in readiness the king’s
horse, Snowmane, and others held the horses of Aragorn and Legolas.
Gimli stood ill at ease, frowning, but Eomer came up to him, leading
´
his horse.
‘Hail, Gimli Glo´ in’s son!’ he cried. ‘I have not had time to learn
gentle speech under your rod, as you promised. But shall we not put
aside our quarrel? At least I will speak no evil again of the Lady of
the Wood.’
‘I will forget my wrath for a while, Eomer son of Eomund,’ said
´
´
Gimli; ‘but if ever you chance to see the Lady Galadriel with your
eyes, then you shall acknowledge her the fairest of ladies, or our
friendship will end.’
‘So be it!’ said Eomer. ‘But until that time pardon me, and in
´
token of pardon ride with me, I beg. Gandalf will be at the head with
the Lord of the Mark; but Firefoot, my horse, will bear us both, if
you will.’
‘I thank you indeed,’ said Gimli greatly pleased. ‘I will gladly go
with you, if Legolas, my comrade, may ride beside us.’
‘It shall be so,’ said Eomer. ‘Legolas upon my left, and Aragorn
´
upon my right, and none will dare to stand before us!’
‘Where is Shadowfax?’ said Gandalf.
‘Running wild over the grass,’ they answered. ‘He will let no man
handle him. There he goes, away down by the ford, like a shadow
among the willows.’
Gandalf whistled and called aloud the horse’s name, and far away
he tossed his head and neighed, and turning sped towards the host
like an arrow.
‘Were the breath of the West Wind to take a body visible, even
so would it appear,’ said Eomer, as the great horse ran up, until he
´
stood before the wizard.
‘The gift seems already to be given,’ said The´oden. ‘But hearken
all! Here now I name my guest, Gandalf Greyhame, wisest of counsel-

lors, most welcome of wanderers, a lord of the Mark, a chieftain of
the Eorlingas while our kin shall last; and I give to him Shadowfax,
prince of horses.’
‘I thank you, The´oden King,’ said Gandalf. Then suddenly he
threw back his grey cloak, and cast aside his hat, and leaped to
horseback. He wore no helm nor mail. His snowy hair ﬂew free in
the wind, his white robes shone dazzling in the sun.
‘Behold the White Rider!’ cried Aragorn, and all took up the words.
‘Our King and the White Rider!’ they shouted. ‘Forth Eorlingas!’
The trumpets sounded. The horses reared and neighed. Spear
clashed on shield. Then the king raised his hand, and with a rush
like the sudden onset of a great wind the last host of Rohan rode
thundering into the West.
´
Far over the plain Eowyn saw the glitter of their spears, as she
stood still, alone before the doors of the silent house.

Chapter 7
H E L M ’ S  D E E P
The sun was already westering as they rode from Edoras, and the
light of it was in their eyes, turning all the rolling ﬁelds of Rohan to
a golden haze. There was a beaten way, north-westward along the
foot-hills of the White Mountains, and this they followed, up and
down in a green country, crossing small swift streams by many fords.
Far ahead and to their right the Misty Mountains loomed; ever darker
and taller they grew as the miles went by. The sun went slowly down
before them. Evening came behind.
The host rode on. Need drove them. Fearing to come too late,
they rode with all the speed they could, pausing seldom. Swift and
enduring were the steeds of Rohan, but there were many leagues to
go. Forty leagues and more it was, as a bird ﬂies, from Edoras to the
fords of the Isen, where they hoped to ﬁnd the king’s men that held
back the hosts of Saruman.
Night closed about them. At last they halted to make their camp.
They had ridden for some ﬁve hours and were far out upon the
western plain, yet more than half their journey lay still before
them. In a great circle, under the starry sky and the waxing moon,
they now made their bivouac. They lit no ﬁres, for they were un-
certain of events; but they set a ring of mounted guards about
them, and scouts rode out far ahead, passing like shadows in the
folds of the land. The slow night passed without tidings or alarm.
At dawn the horns sounded, and within an hour they took the road
again.
There were no clouds overhead yet, but a heaviness was in the
air; it was hot for the season of the year. The rising sun was hazy,
and behind it, following it slowly up the sky, there was a growing
darkness, as of a great storm moving out of the East. And away in
the North-west there seemed to be another darkness brooding about
the feet of the Misty Mountains, a shadow that crept down slowly
from the Wizard’s Vale.
´
Gandalf dropped back to where Legolas rode beside Eomer. ‘You
have the keen eyes of your fair kindred, Legolas,’ he said; ‘and they
can tell a sparrow from a ﬁnch a league off. Tell me, can you see
anything away yonder towards Isengard?’
‘Many miles lie between,’ said Legolas, gazing thither and shading
his eyes with his long hand. ‘I can see a darkness. There are shapes

moving in it, great shapes far away upon the bank of the river; but
what they are I cannot tell. It is not mist or cloud that defeats my
eyes: there is a veiling shadow that some power lays upon the land,
and it marches slowly down stream. It is as if the twilight under
endless trees were ﬂowing downwards from the hills.’
‘And behind us comes a very storm of Mordor,’ said Gandalf. ‘It
will be a black night.’
As the second day of their riding drew on, the heaviness in the air
increased. In the afternoon the dark clouds began to overtake them:
a sombre canopy with great billowing edges ﬂecked with dazzling
light. The sun went down, blood-red in a smoking haze. The spears
of the Riders were tipped with ﬁre as the last shafts of light kindled
the steep faces of the peaks of Thrihyrne: now very near they stood
on the northernmost arm of the White Mountains, three jagged horns
staring at the sunset. In the last red glow men in the vanguard saw
a black speck, a horseman riding back towards them. They halted
awaiting him.
He came, a weary man with dinted helm and cloven shield. Slowly
he climbed from his horse and stood there a while gasping. At length
he spoke. ‘Is Eomer here?’ he asked. ‘You come at last, but too late,
´
and with too little strength. Things have gone evilly since The´odred
fell. We were driven back yesterday over the Isen with great loss;
many perished at the crossing. Then at night fresh forces came over
the river against our camp. All Isengard must be emptied; and
Saruman has armed the wild hillmen and herd-folk of Dunland
beyond the rivers, and these also he loosed upon us. We were over-
mastered. The shield-wall was broken. Erkenbrand of Westfold has
drawn off those men he could gather towards his fastness in Helm’s
Deep. The rest are scattered.
‘Where is Eomer? Tell him there is no hope ahead. He should
´
return to Edoras before the wolves of Isengard come there.’
The´oden had sat silent, hidden from the man’s sight behind his
guards; now he urged his horse forward. ‘Come, stand before me,
Ceorl!’ he said. ‘I am here. The last host of the Eorlingas has ridden
forth. It will not return without battle.’
The man’s face lightened with joy and wonder. He drew himself
up. Then he knelt, offering his notched sword to the king. ‘Command
me, lord!’ he cried. ‘And pardon me! I thought——’
‘You thought I remained in Meduseld bent like an old tree under
winter snow. So it was when you rode to war. But a west wind has
shaken the boughs,’ said The´oden. ‘Give this man a fresh horse! Let
us ride to the help of Erkenbrand!’
*
*
*

While The´oden was speaking, Gandalf rode a short way ahead,
and he sat there alone, gazing north to Isengard and west to the
setting sun. Now he came back.
‘Ride, The´oden!’ he said. ‘Ride to Helm’s Deep! Go not to the
Fords of Isen, and do not tarry in the plain! I must leave you for a
while. Shadowfax must bear me now on a swift errand.’ Turning to
´
Aragorn and Eomer and the men of the king’s household, he cried:
‘Keep well the Lord of the Mark, till I return. Await me at Helm’s
Gate! Farewell!’
He spoke a word to Shadowfax, and like an arrow from the bow
the great horse sprang away. Even as they looked he was gone: a
ﬂash of silver in the sunset, a wind over the grass, a shadow that ﬂed
and passed from sight. Snowmane snorted and reared, eager to fol-
low; but only a swift bird on the wing could have overtaken him.
‘What does that mean?’ said one of the guard to Ha´ma.
‘That Gandalf Greyhame has need of haste,’ answered Ha´ma.
‘Ever he goes and comes unlooked-for.’
‘Wormtongue, were he here, would not ﬁnd it hard to explain,’
said the other.
‘True enough,’ said Ha´ma; ‘but for myself, I will wait until I see
Gandalf again.’
‘Maybe you will wait long,’ said the other.
The host turned away now from the road to the Fords of Isen and
bent their course southward. Night fell, and still they rode on. The
hills drew near, but the tall peaks of Thrihyrne were already dim
against the darkening sky. Still some miles away, on the far side of
the Westfold Vale, a great bay in the mountains, lay a green coomb,
out of which a gorge opened in the hills. Men of that land called it
Helm’s Deep, after a hero of old wars who had made his refuge there.
Ever steeper and narrower it wound inward from the north under
the shadow of the Thrihyrne, till the crowhaunted cliffs rose like
mighty towers on either side, shutting out the light.
At Helm’s Gate, before the mouth of the Deep, there was a heel
of rock thrust outward by the northern cliff. There upon its spur
stood high walls of ancient stone, and within them was a lofty tower.
Men said that in the far-off days of the glory of Gondor the sea-kings
had built here this fastness with the hands of giants. The Hornburg
it was called, for a trumpet sounded upon the tower echoed in the
Deep behind, as if armies long-forgotten were issuing to war from
caves beneath the hills. A wall, too, the men of old had made from
the Hornburg to the southern cliff, barring the entrance to the gorge.
Beneath it by a wide culvert the Deeping-stream passed out. About

the feet of the Hornrock it wound, and ﬂowed then in a gully through
the midst of a wide green gore, sloping gently down from Helm’s
Gate to Helm’s Dike. Thence it fell into the Deeping-coomb and
out into the Westfold Vale. There in the Hornburg at Helm’s Gate
Erkenbrand, master of Westfold on the borders of the Mark, now
dwelt. As the days darkened with threat of war, being wise, he had
repaired the wall and made the fastness strong.
The Riders were still in the low valley before the mouth of the
Coomb, when cries and hornblasts were heard from their scouts that
went in front. Out of the darkness arrows whistled. Swiftly a scout
rode back and reported that wolf-riders were abroad in the valley,
and that a host of Orcs and wild men were hurrying southward from
the Fords of Isen and seemed to be making for Helm’s Deep.
‘We have found many of our folk lying slain as they ﬂed thither,’
said the scout. ‘And we have met scattered companies, going this
way and that, leaderless. What has become of Erkenbrand none seem
to know. It is likely that he will be overtaken ere he can reach Helm’s
Gate, if he has not already perished.’
‘Has aught been seen of Gandalf ?’ asked The´oden.
‘Yes, lord. Many have seen an old man in white upon a horse,
passing hither and thither over the plains like wind in the grass. Some
thought he was Saruman. It is said that he went away ere nightfall
towards Isengard. Some say also that Wormtongue was seen earlier,
going northward with a company of Orcs.’
‘It will go ill with Wormtongue, if Gandalf comes upon him,’ said
The´oden. ‘Nonetheless I miss now both my counsellors, the old and
the new. But in this need we have no better choice than to go on,
as Gandalf said, to Helm’s Gate, whether Erkenbrand be there or
no. Is it known how great is the host that comes from the North?’
‘It is very great,’ said the scout. ‘He that ﬂies counts every foeman
twice, yet I have spoken to stouthearted men, and I do not doubt
that the main strength of the enemy is many times as great as all that
we have here.’
´
‘Then let us be swift,’ said Eomer. ‘Let us drive through such foes
as are already between us and the fastness. There are caves in Helm’s
Deep where hundreds may lie hid; and secret ways lead thence up
on to the hills.’
‘Trust not to secret ways,’ said the king. ‘Saruman has long spied
out this land. Still in that place our defence may last long. Let us
go!’
´
Aragorn and Legolas went now with Eomer in the van. On through
the dark night they rode, ever slower as the darkness deepened and

their way climbed southward, higher and higher into the dim folds
about the mountains’ feet. They found few of the enemy before them.
Here and there they came upon roving bands of Orcs; but they ﬂed
ere the Riders could take or slay them.
´
‘It will not be long I fear,’ said Eomer, ‘ere the coming of the
king’s host will be known to the leader of our enemies, Saruman or
whatever captain he has sent forth.’
The rumour of war grew behind them. Now they could hear, borne
over the dark, the sound of harsh singing. They had climbed far up
into the Deeping-coomb when they looked back. Then they saw
torches, countless points of ﬁery light upon the black ﬁelds behind,
scattered like red ﬂowers, or winding up from the lowlands in long
ﬂickering lines. Here and there a larger blaze leapt up.
‘It is a great host and follows us hard,’ said Aragorn.
‘They bring ﬁre,’ said The´oden, ‘and they are burning as they
come, rick, cot, and tree. This was a rich vale and had many home-
steads. Alas for my folk!’
‘Would that day was here and we might ride down upon them
like a storm out of the mountains!’ said Aragorn. ‘It grieves me to
ﬂy before them.’
‘We need not ﬂy much further,’ said Eomer. ‘Not far ahead now
´
lies Helm’s Dike, an ancient trench and rampart scored across the
coomb, two furlongs below Helm’s Gate. There we can turn and
give battle.’
‘Nay, we are too few to defend the Dike,’ said The´oden. ‘It is a
mile long or more, and the breach in it is wide.’
‘At the breach our rearguard must stand, if we are pressed,’ said
Eomer.
´
There was neither star nor moon when the Riders came to the
breach in the Dike, where the stream from above passed out, and
the road beside it ran down from the Hornburg. The rampart loomed
suddenly before them, a high shadow beyond a dark pit. As they rode
up a sentinel challenged them.
‘The Lord of the Mark rides to Helm’s Gate,’ Eomer answered.
´
´
´
‘I, Eomer son of Eomund, speak.’
‘This is good tidings beyond hope,’ said the sentinel. ‘Hasten! The
enemy is on your heels.’
The host passed through the breach and halted on the sloping
sward above. They now learned to their joy that Erkenbrand had left
many men to hold Helm’s Gate, and more had since escaped thither.
‘Maybe, we have a thousand ﬁt to ﬁght on foot,’ said Gamling,
an old man, the leader of those that watched the Dike. ‘But most of
them have seen too many winters, as I have, or too few, as my son’s

son here. What news of Erkenbrand? Word came yesterday that he
was retreating hither with all that is left of the best Riders of Westfold.
But he has not come.’
´
‘I fear that he will not come now,’ said Eomer. ‘Our scouts have
gained no news of him, and the enemy ﬁlls all the valley behind us.’
‘I would that he had escaped,’ said The´oden. ‘He was a mighty
man. In him lived again the valour of Helm the Hammerhand. But
we cannot await him here. We must draw all our forces now behind
the walls. Are you well stored? We bring little provision, for we rode
forth to open battle, not to a siege.’
‘Behind us in the caves of the Deep are three parts of the folk of
Westfold, old and young, children and women,’ said Gamling. ‘But
great store of food, and many beasts and their fodder, have also been
gathered there.’
‘That is well,’ said Eomer. ‘They are burning or despoiling all that
´
is left in the vale.’
‘If they come to bargain for our goods at Helm’s Gate, they will
pay a high price,’ said Gamling.
The king and his Riders passed on. Before the causeway that crossed
the stream they dismounted. In a long ﬁle they led their horses up
the ramp and passed within the gates of the Hornburg. There they
were welcomed again with joy and renewed hope; for now there were
men enough to man both the burg and the barrier wall.
Quickly Eomer set his men in readiness. The king and the men
´
of his household were in the Hornburg, and there also were many of
the Westfold-men. But on the Deeping Wall and its tower, and behind
it, Eomer arrayed most of the strength that he had, for here the
´
defence seemed more doubtful, if the assault were determined and
in great force. The horses were led far up the Deep under such guard
as could be spared.
The Deeping Wall was twenty feet high, and so thick that four
men could walk abreast along the top, sheltered by a parapet over
which only a tall man could look. Here and there were clefts in the
stone through which men could shoot. This battlement could be
reached by a stair running down from a door in the outer court of
the Hornburg; three ﬂights of steps led also up on to the wall from
the Deep behind; but in front it was smooth, and the great stones of
it were set with such skill that no foothold could be found at their
joints, and at the top they hung over like a sea-delved cliff.
Gimli stood leaning against the breastwork upon the wall. Legolas
sat above on the parapet, ﬁngering his bow, and peering out into the
gloom.

‘This is more to my liking,’ said the dwarf, stamping on the stones.
‘Ever my heart rises as we draw near the mountains. There is good
rock here. This country has tough bones. I felt them in my feet as
we came up from the dike. Give me a year and a hundred of my kin
and I would make this a place that armies would break upon like
water.’
‘I do not doubt it,’ said Legolas. ‘But you are a dwarf, and dwarves
are strange folk. I do not like this place, and I shall like it no more
by the light of day. But you comfort me, Gimli, and I am glad to
have you standing nigh with your stout legs and your hard axe. I
wish there were more of your kin among us. But even more would
I give for a hundred good archers of Mirkwood. We shall need them.
The Rohirrim have good bowmen after their fashion, but there are
too few here, too few.’
‘It is dark for archery,’ said Gimli. ‘Indeed it is time for sleep.
Sleep! I feel the need of it, as never I thought any dwarf could. Riding
is tiring work. Yet my axe is restless in my hand. Give me a row of
orc-necks and room to swing and all weariness will fall from me!’
A slow time passed. Far down in the valley scattered ﬁres still
burned. The hosts of Isengard were advancing in silence now. Their
torches could be seen winding up the coomb in many lines.
Suddenly from the Dike yells and screams, and the ﬁerce battle-
cries of men broke out. Flaming brands appeared over the brink and
clustered thickly at the breach. Then they scattered and vanished.
Men came galloping back over the ﬁeld and up the ramp to the gate
of the Hornburg. The rearguard of the Westfolders had been driven
in.
‘The enemy is at hand!’ they said. ‘We loosed every arrow that
we had, and ﬁlled the Dike with Orcs. But it will not halt them long.
Already they are scaling the bank at many points, thick as marching
ants. But we have taught them not to carry torches.’
It was now past midnight. The sky was utterly dark, and the
stillness of the heavy air foreboded storm. Suddenly the clouds were
seared by a blinding ﬂash. Branched lightning smote down upon the
eastward hills. For a staring moment the watchers on the walls saw
all the space between them and the Dike lit with white light: it was
boiling and crawling with black shapes, some squat and broad, some
tall and grim, with high helms and sable shields. Hundreds and hun-
dreds more were pouring over the Dike and through the breach. The
dark tide ﬂowed up to the walls from cliff to cliff. Thunder rolled in
the valley. Rain came lashing down.
Arrows thick as the rain came whistling over the battlements, and

fell clinking and glancing on the stones. Some found a mark. The
assault on Helm’s Deep had begun, but no sound or challenge was
heard within; no answering arrows came.
The assailing hosts halted, foiled by the silent menace of rock and
wall. Ever and again the lightning tore aside the darkness. Then the
Orcs screamed, waving spear and sword, and shooting a cloud of
arrows at any that stood revealed upon the battlements; and the men
of the Mark amazed looked out, as it seemed to them, upon a great
ﬁeld of dark corn, tossed by a tempest of war, and every ear glinted
with barbed light.
Brazen trumpets sounded. The enemy surged forward, some
against the Deeping Wall, others towards the causeway and the ramp
that led up to the Hornburg-gates. There the hugest Orcs were
mustered, and the wild men of the Dunland fells. A moment they
hesitated and then on they came. The lightning ﬂashed, and blazoned
upon every helm and shield the ghastly hand of Isengard was seen.
They reached the summit of the rock; they drove towards the
gates.
Then at last an answer came: a storm of arrows met them, and a
hail of stones. They wavered, broke, and ﬂed back; and then charged
again, broke and charged again; and each time, like the incoming
sea, they halted at a higher point. Again trumpets rang, and a press
of roaring men leaped forth. They held their great shields above them
like a roof, while in their midst they bore two trunks of mighty trees.
Behind them orc-archers crowded, sending a hail of darts against the
bowmen on the walls. They gained the gates. The trees, swung by
strong arms, smote the timbers with a rending boom. If any man fell,
crushed by a stone hurtling from above, two others sprang to take
his place. Again and again the great rams swung and crashed.
´Eomer and Aragorn stood together on the Deeping Wall. They
heard the roar of voices and the thudding of the rams; and then in
a sudden ﬂash of light they beheld the peril of the gates.
‘Come!’ said Aragorn. ‘This is the hour when we draw swords
together!’
Running like ﬁre, they sped along the wall, and up the steps, and
passed into the outer court upon the Rock. As they ran they gathered
a handful of stout swordsmen. There was a small postern-door that
opened in an angle of the burg-wall on the west, where the cliff
stretched out to meet it. On that side a narrow path ran round towards
the great gate, between the wall and the sheer brink of the Rock.
Together Eomer and Aragorn sprang through the door, their men
´
close behind. The two swords ﬂashed from the sheath as one.
´
‘Gu´thwine¨!’ cried Eomer. ‘Gu´thwine¨ for the Mark!’
‘Andu´ril!’ cried Aragorn. ‘Andu´ril for the Du´nedain!’

Charging from the side, they hurled themselves upon the wild
men. Andu´ril rose and fell, gleaming with white ﬁre. A shout went
up from wall and tower: ‘Andu´ril! Andu´ril goes to war. The Blade
that was Broken shines again!’
Dismayed the rammers let fall the trees and turned to ﬁght; but
the wall of their shields was broken as by a lightning-stroke, and they
were swept away, hewn down, or cast over the Rock into the stony
stream below. The orc-archers shot wildly and then ﬂed.
´
thunder was rumbling in the distance now. The lightning ﬂickered
still, far off among the mountains in the South. A keen wind was
blowing from the North again. The clouds were torn and drifting,
and stars peeped out; and above the hills of the Coomb-side the
westering moon rode, glimmering yellow in the storm-wrack.
‘We did not come too soon,’ said Aragorn, looking at the gates.
Their great hinges and iron bars were wrenched and bent; many of
their timbers were cracked. ‘The doors will not withstand another
such battering.’
‘Yet we cannot stay here beyond the walls to defend them,’ said
Eomer. ‘Look!’ He pointed to the causeway. Already a great press
For a moment Eomer and Aragorn halted before the gates. The
´
of Orcs and Men were gathering again beyond the stream. Arrows
whined, and skipped on the stones about them. ‘Come! We must get
back and see what we can do to pile stone and beam across the gates
within. Come now!’
They turned and ran. At that moment some dozen Orcs that had
lain motionless among the slain leaped to their feet, and came silently
and swiftly behind. Two ﬂung themselves to the ground at Eomer’s
´
heels, tripped him, and in a moment they were on top of him. But
a small dark ﬁgure that none had observed sprang out of the shadows
and gave a hoarse shout: Baruk Khazaˆd! Khazaˆd ai-meˆnu! An axe
swung and swept back. Two Orcs fell headless. The rest ﬂed.
´Eomer struggled to his feet, even as Aragorn ran back to his aid.
The postern was closed again, the iron door was barred and piled
´
inside with stones. When all were safe within, Eomer turned: ‘I thank
you, Gimli son of Glo´in!’ he said. ‘I did not know that you were with
us in the sortie. But oft the unbidden guest proves the best company.
How came you there?’
‘I followed you to shake off sleep,’ said Gimli; ‘but I looked on
the hillmen and they seemed over large for me, so I sat beside a stone
to see your sword-play.’
‘I shall not ﬁnd it easy to repay you,’ said Eomer.
´
‘There may be many a chance ere the night is over,’ laughed the

Dwarf. ‘But I am content. Till now I have hewn naught but wood
since I left Moria.’
‘Two!’ said Gimli, patting his axe. He had returned to his place
on the wall.
‘Two?’ said Legolas. ‘I have done better, though now I must grope
for spent arrows; all mine are gone. Yet I make my tale twenty at
the least. But that is only a few leaves in a forest.’
The sky now was quickly clearing and the sinking moon was shin-
ing brightly. But the light brought little hope to the Riders of the
Mark. The enemy before them seemed to have grown rather than
diminished, and still more were pressing up from the valley through
the breach. The sortie upon the Rock gained only a brief respite.
The assault on the gates was redoubled. Against the Deeping Wall
the hosts of Isengard roared like a sea. Orcs and hillmen swarmed
about its feet from end to end. Ropes with grappling hooks were
hurled over the parapet faster than men could cut them or ﬂing them
back. Hundreds of long ladders were lifted up. Many were cast down
in ruin, but many more replaced them, and Orcs sprang up them
like apes in the dark forests of the South. Before the wall’s foot the
dead and broken were piled like shingle in a storm; ever higher rose
the hideous mounds, and still the enemy came on.
The men of Rohan grew weary. All their arrows were spent, and
every shaft was shot; their swords were notched, and their shields
´
were riven. Three times Aragorn and Eomer rallied them, and three
times Andu´ril ﬂamed in a desperate charge that drove the enemy
from the wall.
Then a clamour arose in the Deep behind. Orcs had crept like
rats through the culvert through which the stream ﬂowed out. There
they had gathered in the shadow of the cliffs, until the assault above
was hottest and nearly all the men of the defence had rushed to the
wall’s top. Then they sprang out. Already some had passed into the
jaws of the Deep and were among the horses, ﬁghting with the guards.
Down from the wall leapt Gimli with a ﬁerce cry that echoed in
the cliffs. ‘Khazaˆd! Khazaˆd!’ He soon had work enough.
‘Ai-oi!’ he shouted. ‘The Orcs are behind the wall. Ai-oi! Come,
Legolas! There are enough for us both. Khazaˆd ai-meˆnu!’
Gamling the Old looked down from the Hornburg, hearing the
great voice of the dwarf above all the tumult. ‘The Orcs are in the Deep!’
he cried. ‘Helm! Helm! Forth Helmingas!’ he shouted as he leaped
down the stair from the Rock with many men of Westfold at his back.
Their onset was ﬁerce and sudden, and the Orcs gave way before

them. Ere long they were hemmed in in the narrows of the gorge,
and all were slain or driven shrieking into the chasm of the Deep to
fall before the guardians of the hidden caves.
‘Twenty-one!’ cried Gimli. He hewed a two-handed stroke and
laid the last Orc before his feet. ‘Now my count passes Master Legolas
again.’
‘We must stop this rat-hole,’ said Gamling. ‘Dwarves are said to
be cunning folk with stone. Lend us your aid, master!’
‘We do not shape stone with battle-axes, nor with our ﬁnger-nails,’
said Gimli. ‘But I will help as I may.’
They gathered such small boulders and broken stones as they
could ﬁnd to hand, and under Gimli’s direction the Westfold-men
blocked up the inner end of the culvert, until only a narrow outlet
remained. Then the Deeping-stream, swollen by the rain, churned
and fretted in its choked path, and spread slowly in cold pools from
cliff to cliff.
‘It will be drier above,’ said Gimli. ‘Come, Gamling, let us see
how things go on the wall!’
He climbed up and found Legolas beside Aragorn and Eomer.
´
The elf was whetting his long knife. There was for a while a lull in
the assault, since the attempt to break in through the culvert had
been foiled.
‘Twenty-one!’ said Gimli.
‘Good!’ said Legolas. ‘But my count is now two dozen. It has been
knife-work up here.’
´Eomer and Aragorn leant wearily on their swords. Away on the
left the crash and clamour of the battle on the Rock rose loud again.
But the Hornburg still held fast, like an island in the sea. Its gates
lay in ruin; but over the barricade of beams and stones within no
enemy as yet had passed.
Aragorn looked at the pale stars, and at the moon, now sloping
behind the western hills that enclosed the valley. ‘This is a night as
long as years,’ he said. ‘How long will the day tarry?’
‘Dawn is not far off,’ said Gamling, who had now climbed up
beside him. ‘But dawn will not help us, I fear.’
‘Yet dawn is ever the hope of men,’ said Aragorn.
‘But these creatures of Isengard, these half-orcs and goblin-men
that the foul craft of Saruman has bred, they will not quail at the
sun,’ said Gamling. ‘And neither will the wild men of the hills. Do
you not hear their voices?’
´
‘I hear them,’ said Eomer; ‘but they are only the scream of birds
and the bellowing of beasts to my ears.’
‘Yet there are many that cry in the Dunland tongue,’ said Gamling.

‘I know that tongue. It is an ancient speech of men, and once was
spoken in many western valleys of the Mark. Hark! They hate us,
and they are glad; for our doom seems certain to them. ‘‘The king,
the king!’’ they cry. ‘‘We will take their king. Death to the Forgoil!
Death to the Strawheads! Death to the robbers of the North!’’ Such
names they have for us. Not in half a thousand years have they
forgotten their grievance that the lords of Gondor gave the Mark to
Eorl the Young and made alliance with him. That old hatred Saruman
has inﬂamed. They are ﬁerce folk when roused. They will not give
way now for dusk or dawn, until The´oden is taken, or they themselves
are slain.’
‘Nonetheless day will bring hope to me,’ said Aragorn. ‘Is it not
said that no foe has ever taken the Hornburg, if men defended it?’
´
‘So the minstrels say,’ said Eomer.
‘Then let us defend it, and hope!’ said Aragorn.
Even as they spoke there came a blare of trumpets. Then there
was a crash and a ﬂash of ﬂame and smoke. The waters of the
Deeping-stream poured out hissing and foaming: they were choked
no longer, a gaping hole was blasted in the wall. A host of dark shapes
poured in.
‘Devilry of Saruman!’ cried Aragorn. ‘They have crept in the cul-
vert again, while we talked, and they have lit the ﬁre of Orthanc
beneath our feet. Elendil, Elendil!’ he shouted, as he leaped down into
the breach; but even as he did so a hundred ladders were raised
against the battlements. Over the wall and under the wall the last
assault came sweeping like a dark wave upon a hill of sand. The
defence was swept away. Some of the Riders were driven back, further
and further into the Deep, falling and ﬁghting as they gave way, step
by step, towards the caves. Others cut their way back towards the
citadel.
A broad stairway climbed from the Deep up to the Rock and the
rear-gate of the Hornburg. Near the bottom stood Aragorn. In his
hand still Andu´ril gleamed, and the terror of the sword for a while
held back the enemy, as one by one all who could gain the stair
passed up towards the gate. Behind on the upper steps knelt Legolas.
His bow was bent, but one gleaned arrow was all that he had left,
and he peered out now, ready to shoot the ﬁrst Orc that should dare
to approach the stair.
‘All who can have now got safe within, Aragorn,’ he called. ‘Come
back!’
Aragorn turned and sped up the stair; but as he ran he stumbled
in his weariness. At once his enemies leapt forward. Up came the
Orcs, yelling, with their long arms stretched out to seize him. The

foremost fell with Legolas’ last arrow in his throat, but the rest sprang
over him. Then a great boulder, cast from the outer wall above,
crashed down upon the stair, and hurled them back into the Deep.
Aragorn gained the door, and swiftly it clanged to behind him.
‘Things go ill, my friends,’ he said, wiping the sweat from his brow
with his arm.
‘Ill enough,’ said Legolas, ‘but not yet hopeless, while we have
you with us. Where is Gimli?’
‘I do not know,’ said Aragorn. ‘I last saw him ﬁghting on the
ground behind the wall, but the enemy swept us apart.’
‘Alas! That is evil news,’ said Legolas.
‘He is stout and strong,’ said Aragorn. ‘Let us hope that he will
escape back to the caves. There he would be safe for a while. Safer
than we. Such a refuge would be to the liking of a dwarf.’
‘That must be my hope,’ said Legolas. ‘But I wish that he had
come this way. I desired to tell Master Gimli that my tale is now
thirty-nine.’
‘If he wins back to the caves, he will pass your count again,’
laughed Aragorn. ‘Never did I see an axe so wielded.’
‘I must go and seek some arrows,’ said Legolas. ‘Would that this
night would end, and I could have better light for shooting.’
Aragorn now passed into the citadel. There to his dismay he
´
learned that Eomer had not reached the Hornburg.
‘Nay, he did not come to the Rock,’ said one of the Westfold-men.
‘I last saw him gathering men about him and ﬁghting in the mouth
of the Deep. Gamling was with him, and the dwarf; but I could not
come to them.’
Aragorn strode on through the inner court, and mounted to a high
chamber in the tower. There stood the king, dark against a narrow
window, looking out upon the vale.
‘What is the news, Aragorn?’ he said.
‘The Deeping Wall is taken, lord, and all the defence swept away;
but many have escaped hither to the Rock.’
‘Is Eomer here?’
´
‘No, lord. But many of your men retreated into the Deep; and
some say that Eomer was amongst them. In the narrows they may
´
hold back the enemy and come within the caves. What hope they
may have then I do not know.’
‘More than we. Good provision, it is said. And the air is wholesome
there because of the outlets through ﬁssures in the rock far above.
None can force an entrance against determined men. They may hold
out long.’
‘But the Orcs have brought a devilry from Orthanc,’ said Aragorn.

‘They have a blasting ﬁre, and with it they took the Wall. If they
cannot come in the caves, they may seal up those that are inside. But
now we must turn all our thought to our own defence.’
‘I fret in this prison,’ said The´oden. ‘If I could have set a spear in
rest, riding before my men upon the ﬁeld, maybe I could have felt
again the joy of battle, and so ended. But I serve little purpose here.’
‘Here at least you are guarded in the strongest fastness of the
Mark,’ said Aragorn. ‘More hope we have to defend you in the
Hornburg than in Edoras, or even at Dunharrow in the mountains.’
‘It is said that the Hornburg has never fallen to assault,’ said
The´oden; ‘but now my heart is doubtful. The world changes, and
all that once was strong now proves unsure. How shall any tower
withstand such numbers and such reckless hate? Had I known that
the strength of Isengard was grown so great, maybe I should not so
rashly have ridden forth to meet it, for all the arts of Gandalf. His
counsel seems not now so good as it did under the morning sun.’
‘Do not judge the counsel of Gandalf, until all is over, lord,’ said
Aragorn.
‘The end will not be long,’ said the king. ‘But I will not end here,
taken like an old badger in a trap. Snowmane and Hasufel and the
horses of my guard are in the inner court. When dawn comes, I will
bid men sound Helm’s horn, and I will ride forth. Will you ride with
me then, son of Arathorn? Maybe we shall cleave a road, or make
such an end as will be worth a song – if any be left to sing of us
hereafter.’
‘I will ride with you,’ said Aragorn.
Taking his leave, he returned to the walls, and passed round all
their circuit, enheartening the men, and lending aid wherever the
assault was hot. Legolas went with him. Blasts of ﬁre leaped up from
below shaking the stones. Grappling-hooks were hurled, and ladders
raised. Again and again the Orcs gained the summit of the outer wall,
and again the defenders cast them down.
At last Aragorn stood above the great gates, heedless of the darts
of the enemy. As he looked forth he saw the eastern sky grow pale.
Then he raised his empty hand, palm outward in token of parley.
The Orcs yelled and jeered. ‘Come down! Come down!’ they cried.
‘If you wish to speak to us, come down! Bring out your king! We are
the ﬁghting Uruk-hai. We will fetch him from his hole, if he does
not come. Bring out your skulking king!’
‘The king stays or comes at his own will,’ said Aragorn.
‘Then what are you doing here?’ they answered. ‘Why do you look
out? Do you wish to see the greatness of our army? We are the ﬁghting
Uruk-hai.’

‘I looked out to see the dawn,’ said Aragorn.
‘What of the dawn?’ they jeered. ‘We are the Uruk-hai: we do not
stop the ﬁght for night or day, for fair weather or for storm. We come
to kill, by sun or moon. What of the dawn?’
‘None knows what the new day shall bring him,’ said Aragorn.
‘Get you gone, ere it turn to your evil.’
‘Get down or we will shoot you from the wall,’ they cried. ‘This
is no parley. You have nothing to say.’
‘I have still this to say,’ answered Aragorn. ‘No enemy has yet
taken the Hornburg. Depart, or not one of you will be spared. Not
one will be left alive to take back tidings to the North. You do not
know your peril.’
So great a power and royalty was revealed in Aragorn, as he stood
there alone above the ruined gates before the host of his enemies, that
many of the wild men paused, and looked back over their shoulders to
the valley, and some looked up doubtfully at the sky. But the Orcs
laughed with loud voices; and a hail of darts and arrows whistled
over the wall, as Aragorn leaped down.
There was a roar and a blast of ﬁre. The archway of the gate above
which he had stood a moment before crumbled and crashed in smoke
and dust. The barricade was scattered as if by a thunderbolt. Aragorn
ran to the king’s tower.
But even as the gate fell, and the Orcs about it yelled, preparing
to charge, a murmur arose behind them, like a wind in the distance,
and it grew to a clamour of many voices crying strange news in the
dawn. The Orcs upon the Rock, hearing the rumour of dismay,
wavered and looked back. And then, sudden and terrible, from the
tower above, the sound of the great horn of Helm rang out.
All that heard that sound trembled. Many of the Orcs cast them-
selves on their faces and covered their ears with their claws. Back
from the Deep the echoes came, blast upon blast, as if on every cliff
and hill a mighty herald stood. But on the walls men looked up,
listening with wonder; for the echoes did not die. Ever the hornblasts
wound on among the hills; nearer now and louder they answered
one to another, blowing ﬁerce and free.
‘Helm! Helm!’ the Riders shouted. ‘Helm is arisen and comes
back to war. Helm for The´oden King!’
And with that shout the king came. His horse was white as snow,
golden was his shield, and his spear was long. At his right hand was
Aragorn, Elendil’s heir, behind him rode the lords of the House of
Eorl the Young. Light sprang in the sky. Night departed.
‘Forth Eorlingas!’ With a cry and a great noise they charged. Down
from the gates they roared, over the causeway they swept, and they

drove through the hosts of Isengard as a wind among grass. Behind
them from the Deep came the stern cries of men issuing from the
caves, driving forth the enemy. Out poured all the men that were left
upon the Rock. And ever the sound of blowing horns echoed in the
hills.
On they rode, the king and his companions. Captains and cham-
pions fell or ﬂed before them. Neither orc nor man withstood them.
Their backs were to the swords and spears of the Riders, and their
faces to the valley. They cried and wailed, for fear and great wonder
had come upon them with the rising of the day.
So King The´oden rode from Helm’s Gate and clove his path to
the great Dike. There the company halted. Light grew bright about
them. Shafts of the sun ﬂared above the eastern hills and glimmered
on their spears. But they sat silent on their horses, and they gazed
down upon the Deeping-coomb.
The land had changed. Where before the green dale had lain, its
grassy slopes lapping the ever-mounting hills, there now a forest
loomed. Great trees, bare and silent, stood, rank on rank, with tangled
bough and hoary head; their twisted roots were buried in the long
green grass. Darkness was under them. Between the Dike and the
eaves of that nameless wood only two open furlongs lay. There now
cowered the proud hosts of Saruman, in terror of the king and in
terror of the trees. They streamed down from Helm’s Gate until all
above the Dike was empty of them, but below it they were packed
like swarming ﬂies. Vainly they crawled and clambered about the
walls of the coomb, seeking to escape. Upon the east too sheer and
stony was the valley’s side; upon the left, from the west, their ﬁnal
doom approached.
There suddenly upon a ridge appeared a rider, clad in white,
shining in the rising sun. Over the low hills the horns were sounding.
Behind him, hastening down the long slopes, were a thousand men
on foot; their swords were in their hands. Amid them strode a man
tall and strong. His shield was red. As he came to the valley’s brink,
he set to his lips a great black horn and blew a ringing blast.
‘Erkenbrand!’ the Riders shouted. ‘Erkenbrand!’
‘Behold the White Rider!’ cried Aragorn. ‘Gandalf is come again!’
‘Mithrandir, Mithrandir!’ said Legolas. ‘This is wizardry indeed!
Come! I would look on this forest, ere the spell changes.’
The hosts of Isengard roared, swaying this way and that, turning
from fear to fear. Again the horn sounded from the tower. Down
through the breach of the Dike charged the king’s company. Down
from the hills leaped Erkenbrand, lord of Westfold. Down leaped

Shadowfax, like a deer that runs surefooted in the mountains. The
White Rider was upon them, and the terror of his coming ﬁlled the
enemy with madness. The wild men fell on their faces before him.
The Orcs reeled and screamed and cast aside both sword and spear.
Like a black smoke driven by a mounting wind they ﬂed. Wailing
they passed under the waiting shadow of the trees; and from that
shadow none ever came again.

Chapter 8
T H E  R O A D  T O  I S E N G A R D
So it was that in the light of a fair morning King The´oden and
Gandalf the White Rider met again upon the green grass beside the
Deeping-stream. There was also Aragorn son of Arathorn, and
Legolas the Elf, and Erkenbrand of Westfold, and the lords of the
Golden House. About them were gathered the Rohirrim, the Riders
of the Mark: wonder overcame their joy in victory, and their eyes
were turned towards the wood.
Suddenly there was a great shout, and down from the Dike came
those who had been driven back into the Deep. There came Gamling
the Old, and Eomer son of Eomund, and beside them walked Gimli
´
´
the dwarf. He had no helm, and about his head was a linen band
stained with blood; but his voice was loud and strong.
‘Forty-two, Master Legolas!’ he cried. ‘Alas! My axe is notched:
the forty-second had an iron collar on his neck. How is it with you?’
‘You have passed my score by one,’ answered Legolas. ‘But I do
not grudge you the game, so glad am I to see you on your legs!’
´
‘Welcome, Eomer, sister-son!’ said The´oden. ‘Now that I see you
safe, I am glad indeed.’
‘Hail, Lord of the Mark!’ said Eomer. ‘The dark night has passed,
´
and day has come again. But the day has brought strange tidings.’
He turned and gazed in wonder, ﬁrst at the wood and then at Gandalf.
‘Once more you come in the hour of need, unlooked-for,’ he said.
‘Unlooked-for?’ said Gandalf. ‘I said that I would return and meet
you here.’
‘But you did not name the hour, nor foretell the manner of your
coming. Strange help you bring. You are mighty in wizardry, Gandalf
the White!’
‘That may be. But if so, I have not shown it yet. I have but given
good counsel in peril, and made use of the speed of Shadowfax. Your
own valour has done more, and the stout legs of the Westfold-men
marching through the night.’
Then they all gazed at Gandalf with still greater wonder. Some
glanced darkly at the wood, and passed their hands over their brows,
as if they thought their eyes saw otherwise than his.
Gandalf laughed long and merrily. ‘The trees?’ he said. ‘Nay, I
see the wood as plainly as do you. But that is no deed of mine. It is
a thing beyond the counsel of the wise. Better than my design, and
better even than my hope the event has proved.’

‘Then if not yours, whose is the wizardry?’ said The´oden. ‘Not
Saruman’s, that is plain. Is there some mightier sage, of whom we
have yet to learn?’
‘It is not wizardry, but a power far older,’ said Gandalf: ‘a power
that walked the earth, ere elf sang or hammer rang.
Ere iron was found or tree was hewn,
When young was mountain under moon;
Ere ring was made, or wrought was woe,
It walked the forests long ago.’
‘And what may be the answer to your riddle?’ said The´oden.
‘If you would learn that, you should come with me to Isengard,’
answered Gandalf.
‘To Isengard?’ they cried.
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘I shall return to Isengard, and those who will
may come with me. There we may see strange things.’
‘But there are not men enough in the Mark, not if they were all
gathered together and healed of wounds and weariness, to assault
the stronghold of Saruman,’ said The´oden.
‘Nevertheless to Isengard I go,’ said Gandalf. ‘I shall not stay there
long. My way lies now eastward. Look for me in Edoras, ere the
waning of the moon!’
‘Nay!’ said The´oden. ‘In the dark hour before dawn I doubted,
but we will not part now. I will come with you, if that is your counsel.’
‘I wish to speak with Saruman, as soon as may be now,’ said
Gandalf, ‘and since he has done you great injury, it would be ﬁtting
if you were there. But how soon and how swiftly will you ride?’
‘My men are weary with battle,’ said the King; ‘and I am weary
also. For I have ridden far and slept little. Alas! My old age is not
feigned nor due only to the whisperings of Wormtongue. It is an ill
that no leech can wholly cure, not even Gandalf.’
‘Then let all who are to ride with me rest now,’ said Gandalf. ‘We
will journey under the shadow of evening. It is as well; for it is my
counsel that all our comings and goings should be as secret as may
be, henceforth. But do not command many men to go with you,
The´oden. We go to a parley not to a ﬁght.’
The King then chose men that were unhurt and had swift horses,
and he sent them forth with tidings of the victory into every vale of
the Mark; and they bore his summons also, bidding all men, young
and old, to come in haste to Edoras. There the Lord of the Mark
would hold an assembly of all that could bear arms, on the third day
after the full moon. To ride with him to Isengard the King chose
Eomer and twenty men of his household. With Gandalf would go
´

Aragorn, and Legolas, and Gimli. In spite of his hurt the dwarf would
not stay behind.
‘It was only a feeble blow and the cap turned it,’ he said. ‘It would
take more than such an orc-scratch to keep me back.’
‘I will tend it, while you rest,’ said Aragorn.
The king now returned to the Hornburg, and slept, such a sleep
of quiet as he had not known for many years, and the remainder of
his chosen company rested also. But the others, all that were not
hurt or wounded, began a great labour; for many had fallen in the
battle and lay dead upon the ﬁeld or in the Deep.
No Orcs remained alive; their bodies were uncounted. But a great
many of the hillmen had given themselves up; and they were afraid,
and cried for mercy.
The Men of the Mark took their weapons from them, and set
them to work.
‘Help now to repair the evil in which you have joined,’ said Erken-
brand; ‘and afterwards you shall take an oath never again to pass the
Fords of Isen in arms, nor to march with the enemies of Men; and
then you shall go free back to your land. For you have been deluded
by Saruman. Many of you have got death as the reward of your trust
in him; but had you conquered, little better would your wages have
been.’
The men of Dunland were amazed; for Saruman had told them
that the men of Rohan were cruel and burned their captives alive.
In the midst of the ﬁeld before the Hornburg two mounds were
raised, and beneath them were laid all the Riders of the Mark who
fell in the defence, those of the East Dales upon one side, and those
of Westfold upon the other. But the men of Dunland were set apart
in a mound below the Dike. In a grave alone under the shadow of
the Hornburg lay Ha´ma, captain of the King’s guard. He fell before
the Gate.
The Orcs were piled in great heaps, away from the mounds of
Men, not far from the eaves of the forest. And the people were
troubled in their minds; for the heaps of carrion were too great for
burial or for burning. They had little wood for ﬁring, and none would
have dared to take an axe to the strange trees, even if Gandalf had
not warned them to hurt neither bark nor bough at their great peril.
‘Let the Orcs lie,’ said Gandalf. ‘The morning may bring new
counsel.’
In the afternoon the King’s company prepared to depart. The
work of burial was then but beginning; and The´oden mourned for
the loss of Ha´ma, his captain, and cast the ﬁrst earth upon his grave.

‘Great injury indeed has Saruman done to me and all this land,’ he
said; ‘and I will remember it, when we meet.’
The sun was already drawing near the hills upon the west of the
Coomb, when at last The´oden and Gandalf and their companions
rode down from the Dike. Behind them were gathered a great host,
both of the Riders and of the people of Westfold, old and young,
women and children, who had come out from the caves. A song of
victory they sang with clear voices; and then they fell silent, wondering
what would chance, for their eyes were on the trees and they feared
them.
The Riders came to the wood, and they halted; horse and man,
they were unwilling to pass in. The trees were grey and menacing,
and a shadow or a mist was about them. The ends of their long
sweeping boughs hung down like searching ﬁngers, their roots stood
up from the ground like the limbs of strange monsters, and dark
caverns opened beneath them. But Gandalf went forward, leading
the company, and where the road from the Hornburg met the trees
they saw now an opening like an arched gate under mighty boughs;
and through it Gandalf passed, and they followed him. Then to their
amazement they found that the road ran on, and the Deeping-stream
beside it; and the sky was open above and full of golden light. But
on either side the great aisles of the wood were already wrapped in
dusk, stretching away into impenetrable shadows; and there they
heard the creaking and groaning of boughs, and far cries, and a
rumour of wordless voices, murmuring angrily. No Orc or other living
creature could be seen.
Legolas and Gimli were now riding together upon one horse; and
they kept close beside Gandalf, for Gimli was afraid of the wood.
‘It is hot in here,’ said Legolas to Gandalf. ‘I feel a great wrath
about me. Do you not feel the air throb in your ears?’
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf.
‘What has become of the miserable Orcs?’ said Legolas.
‘That, I think, no one will ever know,’ said Gandalf.
They rode in silence for a while; but Legolas was ever glancing
from side to side, and would often have halted to listen to the sounds
of the wood, if Gimli had allowed it.
‘These are the strangest trees that ever I saw,’ he said; ‘and I have
seen many an oak grow from acorn to ruinous age. I wish that there
were leisure now to walk among them: they have voices, and in time
I might come to understand their thought.’
‘No, no!’ said Gimli. ‘Let us leave them! I guess their thought
already: hatred of all that go on two legs; and their speech is of
crushing and strangling.’

‘Not of all that go on two legs,’ said Legolas. ‘There I think you
are wrong. It is Orcs that they hate. For they do not belong here and
know little of Elves and Men. Far away are the valleys where they
sprang. From the deep dales of Fangorn, Gimli, that is whence they
come, I guess.’
‘Then that is the most perilous wood in Middle-earth,’ said Gimli.
‘I should be grateful for the part they have played, but I do not love
them. You may think them wonderful, but I have seen a greater
wonder in this land, more beautiful than any grove or glade that ever
grew: my heart is still full of it.
‘Strange are the ways of Men, Legolas! Here they have one of the
marvels of the Northern World, and what do they say of it? Caves,
they say! Caves! Holes to ﬂy to in time of war, to store fodder in!
My good Legolas, do you know that the caverns of Helm’s Deep are
vast and beautiful? There would be an endless pilgrimage of Dwarves,
merely to gaze at them, if such things were known to be. Aye indeed,
they would pay pure gold for a brief glance!’
‘And I would give gold to be excused,’ said Legolas; ‘and double
to be let out, if I strayed in!’
‘You have not seen, so I forgive your jest,’ said Gimli. ‘But you
speak like a fool. Do you think those halls are fair, where your King
dwells under the hill in Mirkwood, and Dwarves helped in their
making long ago? They are but hovels compared with the caverns I
have seen here: immeasurable halls, ﬁlled with an everlasting music of
water that tinkles into pools, as fair as Kheled-zaˆram in the starlight.
‘And, Legolas, when the torches are kindled and men walk on the
sandy ﬂoors under the echoing domes, ah! then, Legolas, gems and
crystals and veins of precious ore glint in the polished walls; and the
light glows through folded marbles, shell-like, translucent as the living
hands of Queen Galadriel. There are columns of white and saffron
and dawn-rose, Legolas, ﬂuted and twisted into dreamlike forms;
they spring up from many-coloured ﬂoors to meet the glistening
pendants of the roof: wings, ropes, curtains ﬁne as frozen clouds;
spears, banners, pinnacles of suspended palaces! Still lakes mirror
them: a glimmering world looks up from dark pools covered with clear
glass; cities, such as the mind of Durin could scarce have imagined in
his sleep, stretch on through avenues and pillared courts, on into the
dark recesses where no light can come. And plink! a silver drop falls,
and the round wrinkles in the glass make all the towers bend and
waver like weeds and corals in a grotto of the sea. Then evening
comes: they fade and twinkle out; the torches pass on into another
chamber and another dream. There is chamber after chamber,
Legolas; hall opening out of hall, dome after dome, stair beyond stair;
and still the winding paths lead on into the mountains’ heart. Caves!

The Caverns of Helm’s Deep! Happy was the chance that drove me
there! It makes me weep to leave them.’
‘Then I will wish you this fortune for your comfort, Gimli,’ said
the Elf, ‘that you may come safe from war and return to see them
again. But do not tell all your kindred! There seems little left for
them to do, from your account. Maybe the men of this land are wise
to say little: one family of busy dwarves with hammer and chisel
might mar more than they made.’
‘No, you do not understand,’ said Gimli. ‘No dwarf could be
unmoved by such loveliness. None of Durin’s race would mine those
caves for stones or ore, not if diamonds and gold could be got there.
Do you cut down groves of blossoming trees in the springtime for
ﬁrewood? We would tend these glades of ﬂowering stone, not quarry
them. With cautious skill, tap by tap – a small chip of rock and no
more, perhaps, in a whole anxious day – so we could work, and as
the years went by, we should open up new ways, and display far
chambers that are still dark, glimpsed only as a void beyond ﬁssures
in the rock. And lights, Legolas! We should make lights, such lamps
as once shone in Khazad-duˆm; and when we wished we would drive
away the night that has lain there since the hills were made; and
when we desired rest, we would let the night return.’
‘You move me, Gimli,’ said Legolas. ‘I have never heard you speak
like this before. Almost you make me regret that I have not seen
these caves. Come! Let us make this bargain – if we both return safe
out of the perils that await us, we will journey for a while together.
You shall visit Fangorn with me, and then I will come with you to
see Helm’s Deep.’
‘That would not be the way of return that I should choose,’ said
Gimli. ‘But I will endure Fangorn, if I have your promise to come
back to the caves and share their wonder with me.’
‘You have my promise,’ said Legolas. ‘But alas! Now we must
leave behind both cave and wood for a while. See! We are coming
to the end of the trees. How far is it to Isengard, Gandalf ?’
‘About ﬁfteen leagues, as the crows of Saruman make it,’ said
Gandalf: ‘ﬁve from the mouth of Deeping-coomb to the Fords; and
ten more from there to the gates of Isengard. But we shall not ride
all the way this night.’
‘And when we come there, what shall we see?’ asked Gimli. ‘You
may know, but I cannot guess.’
‘I do not know myself for certain,’ answered the wizard. ‘I was
there at nightfall yesterday, but much may have happened since. Yet
I think that you will not say that the journey was in vain – not though
the Glittering Caves of Aglarond be left behind.’
*
*
*

At last the company passed through the trees, and found that they
had come to the bottom of the Coomb, where the road from Helm’s
Deep branched, going one way east to Edoras, and the other north to
the Fords of Isen. As they rode from under the eaves of the wood,
Legolas halted and looked back with regret. Then he gave a sudden cry.
‘There are eyes!’ he said. ‘Eyes looking out from the shadows of
the boughs! I never saw such eyes before.’
The others, surprised by his cry, halted and turned; but Legolas
started to ride back.
‘No, no!’ cried Gimli. ‘Do as you please in your madness, but let
me ﬁrst get down from this horse! I wish to see no eyes!’
‘Stay, Legolas Greenleaf !’ said Gandalf. ‘Do not go back into the
wood, not yet! Now is not your time.’
Even as he spoke, there came forward out of the trees three strange
shapes. As tall as trolls they were, twelve feet or more in height; their
strong bodies, stout as young trees, seemed to be clad with raiment
or with hide of close-ﬁtting grey and brown. Their limbs were long,
and their hands had many ﬁngers; their hair was stiff, and their beards
grey-green as moss. They gazed out with solemn eyes, but they were
not looking at the riders: their eyes were bent northwards. Suddenly
they lifted their long hands to their mouths, and sent forth ringing
calls, clear as notes of a horn, but more musical and various. The
calls were answered; and turning again, the riders saw other creatures
of the same kind approaching, striding through the grass. They came
swiftly from the North, walking like wading herons in their gait, but
not in their speed; for their legs in their long paces beat quicker than
the heron’s wings. The riders cried aloud in wonder, and some set
their hands upon their sword-hilts.
‘You need no weapons,’ said Gandalf. ‘These are but herdsmen.
They are not enemies, indeed they are not concerned with us at all.’
So it seemed to be; for as he spoke the tall creatures, without a
glance at the riders, strode into the wood and vanished.
‘Herdsmen!’ said The´oden. ‘Where are their ﬂocks? What are they,
Gandalf ? For it is plain that to you, at any rate, they are not strange.’
‘They are the shepherds of the trees,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Is it so
long since you listened to tales by the ﬁreside? There are children in
your land who, out of the twisted threads of story, could pick the
answer to your question. You have seen Ents, O King, Ents out of
Fangorn Forest, which in your tongue you call the Entwood. Did
you think that the name was given only in idle fancy? Nay, The´oden,
it is otherwise: to them you are but the passing tale; all the years
from Eorl the Young to The´oden the Old are of little count to them;
and all the deeds of your house but a small matter.’
The king was silent. ‘Ents!’ he said at length. ‘Out of the shadows

of legend I begin a little to understand the marvel of the trees, I
think. I have lived to see strange days. Long we have tended our
beasts and our ﬁelds, built our houses, wrought our tools, or ridden
away to help in the wars of Minas Tirith. And that we called the life
of Men, the way of the world. We cared little for what lay beyond
the borders of our land. Songs we have that tell of these things, but
we are forgetting them, teaching them only to children, as a careless
custom. And now the songs have come down among us out of strange
places, and walk visible under the Sun.’
‘You should be glad, The´oden King,’ said Gandalf. ‘For not only
the little life of Men is now endangered, but the life also of those
things which you have deemed the matter of legend. You are not
without allies, even if you know them not.’
‘Yet also I should be sad,’ said The´oden. ‘For however the fortune
of war shall go, may it not so end that much that was fair and
wonderful shall pass for ever out of Middle-earth?’
‘It may,’ said Gandalf. ‘The evil of Sauron cannot be wholly cured,
nor made as if it had not been. But to such days we are doomed.
Let us now go on with the journey we have begun!’
The company turned then away from the Coomb and from the
wood and took the road towards the Fords. Legolas followed reluc-
tantly. The sun had set, already it had sunk behind the rim of the
world; but as they rode out from the shadow of the hills and looked
west to the Gap of Rohan the sky was still red, and a burning light
was under the ﬂoating clouds. Dark against it there wheeled and ﬂew
many black-winged birds. Some passed overhead with mournful cries,
returning to their homes among the rocks.
‘The carrion-fowl have been busy about the battle-ﬁeld,’ said
´Eomer.
They rode now at an easy pace and dark came down upon the
plains about them. The slow moon mounted, now waxing towards
the full, and in its cold silver light the swelling grass-lands rose and
fell like a wide grey sea. They had ridden for some four hours from
the branching of the roads when they drew near to the Fords. Long
slopes ran swiftly down to where the river spread in stony shoals
between high grassy terraces. Borne upon the wind they heard the
howling of wolves. Their hearts were heavy, remembering the many
men that had fallen in battle in this place.
The road dipped between rising turf-banks, carving its way
through the terraces to the river’s edge, and up again upon the further
side. There were three lines of ﬂat stepping-stones across the stream,
and between them fords for horses, that went from either brink to a
bare eyot in the midst. The riders looked down upon the crossings,

and it seemed strange to them; for the Fords had ever been a place
full of the rush and chatter of water upon stones; but now they were
silent. The beds of the stream were almost dry, a bare waste of
shingles and grey sand.
´
‘This is become a dreary place,’ said Eomer. ‘What sickness has
befallen the river? Many fair things Saruman has destroyed: has he
devoured the springs of Isen too?’
‘So it would seem,’ said Gandalf.
‘Alas!’ said The´oden. ‘Must we pass this way, where the carrion-
beasts devour so many good Riders of the Mark?’
‘This is our way,’ said Gandalf. ‘Grievous is the fall of your men;
but you shall see that at least the wolves of the mountains do not
devour them. It is with their friends, the Orcs, that they hold their
feast: such indeed is the friendship of their kind. Come!’
They rode down to the river, and as they came the wolves ceased
their howling and slunk away. Fear fell on them seeing Gandalf in
the moon, and Shadowfax his horse shining like silver. The riders
passed over to the islet, and glittering eyes watched them wanly from
the shadows of the banks.
‘Look!’ said Gandalf. ‘Friends have laboured here.’
And they saw that in the midst of the eyot a mound was piled,
ringed with stones, and set about with many spears.
‘Here lie all the Men of the Mark that fell near this place,’ said
Gandalf.
‘Here let them rest!’ said Eomer. ‘And when their spears have
´
rotted and rusted, long still may their mound stand and guard the
Fords of Isen!’
‘Is this your work also, Gandalf, my friend?’ said The´oden. ‘You
accomplished much in an evening and a night!’
‘With the help of Shadowfax – and others,’ said Gandalf. ‘I rode
fast and far. But here beside the mound I will say this for your
comfort: many fell in the battles of the Fords, but fewer than rumour
made them. More were scattered than were slain; I gathered together
all that I could ﬁnd. Some men I sent with Grimbold of Westfold to
join Erkenbrand. Some I set to make this burial. They have now
followed your marshal, Elfhelm. I sent him with many Riders to
Edoras. Saruman I knew had despatched his full strength against
you, and his servants had turned aside from all other errands and
gone to Helm’s Deep: the lands seemed empty of enemies; yet I
feared that wolf-riders and plunderers might ride nonetheless to
Meduseld, while it was undefended. But now I think you need not
fear: you will ﬁnd your house to welcome your return.’
‘And glad shall I be to see it again,’ said The´oden, ‘though brief
now, I doubt not, shall be my abiding there.’

With that the company said farewell to the island and the mound,
and passed over the river, and climbed the further bank. Then they
rode on, glad to have left the mournful Fords. As they went the
howling of the wolves broke out anew.
There was an ancient highway that ran down from Isengard to the
crossings. For some way it took its course beside the river, bending
with it east and then north; but at the last it turned away and went
straight towards the gates of Isengard; and these were under the
mountain-side in the west of the valley, sixteen miles or more from
its mouth. This road they followed but they did not ride upon it; for
the ground beside it was ﬁrm and level, covered for many miles
about with short springing turf. They rode now more swiftly, and by
midnight the Fords were nearly ﬁve leagues behind. Then they halted,
ending their night’s journey, for the King was weary. They were come
to the feet of the Misty Mountains, and the long arms of Nan Curunı´r
stretched down to meet them. Dark lay the vale before them, for the
moon had passed into the West, and its light was hidden by the hills.
But out of the deep shadow of the dale rose a vast spire of smoke and
vapour; as it mounted, it caught the rays of the sinking moon, and
spread in shimmering billows, black and silver, over the starry sky.
‘What do you think of that, Gandalf ?’ asked Aragorn. ‘One would
say that all the Wizard’s Vale was burning.’
´
‘There is ever a fume above that valley in these days,’ said Eomer:
‘but I have never seen aught like this before. These are steams rather
than smokes. Saruman is brewing some devilry to greet us. Maybe he
is boiling all the waters of Isen, and that is why the river runs dry.’
‘Maybe he is,’ said Gandalf. ‘Tomorrow we shall learn what he is
doing. Now let us rest for a while, if we can.’
They camped beside the bed of the Isen river; it was still silent
and empty. Some of them slept a little. But late in the night the
watchmen cried out, and all awoke. The moon was gone. Stars were
shining above; but over the ground there crept a darkness blacker
than the night. On both sides of the river it rolled towards them,
going northward.
‘Stay where you are!’ said Gandalf. ‘Draw no weapons! Wait! and
it will pass you by!’
A mist gathered about them. Above them a few stars still glim-
mered faintly; but on either side there arose walls of impenetrable
gloom; they were in a narrow lane between moving towers of shadow.
Voices they heard, whisperings and groanings and an endless rustling
sigh; the earth shook under them. Long it seemed to them that they
sat and were afraid; but at last the darkness and the rumour passed,
and vanished between the mountain’s arms.
*
*
*

Away south upon the Hornburg, in the middle night men heard
a great noise, as a wind in the valley, and the ground trembled; and
all were afraid and no one ventured to go forth. But in the morning
they went out and were amazed; for the slain Orcs were gone, and
the trees also. Far down into the valley of the Deep the grass was
crushed and trampled brown, as if giant herdsmen had pastured great
droves of cattle there; but a mile below the Dike a huge pit had been
delved in the earth, and over it stones were piled into a hill. Men
believed that the Orcs whom they had slain were buried there; but
whether those who had ﬂed into the wood were with them, none
could say, for no man ever set foot upon that hill. The Death Down
it was afterwards called, and no grass would grow there. But the
strange trees were never seen in Deeping-coomb again; they had
returned at night, and had gone far away to the dark dales of Fangorn.
Thus they were revenged upon the Orcs.
The king and his company slept no more that night; but they saw
and heard no other strange thing, save one: the voice of the river
beside them suddenly awoke. There was a rush of water hurrying
down among the stones; and when it had passed, the Isen ﬂowed
and bubbled in its bed again, as it had ever done.
At dawn they made ready to go on. The light came grey and pale,
and they did not see the rising of the sun. The air above was heavy
with fog, and a reek lay on the land about them. They went slowly,
riding now upon the highway. It was broad and hard, and well-
tended. Dimly through the mists they could descry the long arm of
the mountains rising on their left. They had passed into Nan Curunı´r,
the Wizard’s Vale. That was a sheltered valley, open only to the
South. Once it had been fair and green, and through it the Isen
ﬂowed, already deep and strong before it found the plains; for it was
fed by many springs and lesser streams among the rain-washed hills,
and all about it there had lain a pleasant, fertile land.
It was not so now. Beneath the walls of Isengard there still were
acres tilled by the slaves of Saruman; but most of the valley had
become a wilderness of weeds and thorns. Brambles trailed upon the
ground, or clambering over bush and bank, made shaggy caves where
small beasts housed. No trees grew there; but among the rank grasses
could still be seen the burned and axe-hewn stumps of ancient groves.
It was a sad country, silent now but for the stony noise of quick
waters. Smokes and steams drifted in sullen clouds and lurked in the
hollows. The riders did not speak. Many doubted in their hearts,
wondering to what dismal end their journey led.
After they had ridden for some miles, the highway became a wide
street, paved with great ﬂat stones, squared and laid with skill; no

blade of grass was seen in any joint. Deep gutters, ﬁlled with trickling
water, ran down on either side. Suddenly a tall pillar loomed up
before them. It was black; and set upon it was a great stone, carved
and painted in the likeness of a long White Hand. Its ﬁnger pointed
north. Not far now they knew that the gates of Isengard must stand,
and their hearts were heavy; but their eyes could not pierce the mists
ahead.
Beneath the mountain’s arm within the Wizard’s Vale through
years uncounted had stood that ancient place that Men called Isen-
gard. Partly it was shaped in the making of the mountains, but mighty
works the Men of Westernesse had wrought there of old; and
Saruman had dwelt there long and had not been idle.
This was its fashion, while Saruman was at his height, accounted
by many the chief of Wizards. A great ring-wall of stone, like towering
cliffs, stood out from the shelter of the mountain-side, from which
it ran and then returned again. One entrance only was there made
in it, a great arch delved in the southern wall. Here through the black
rock a long tunnel had been hewn, closed at either end with mighty
doors of iron. They were so wrought and poised upon their huge
hinges, posts of steel driven into the living stone, that when unbarred
they could be moved with a light thrust of the arms, noiselessly. One
who passed in and came at length out of the echoing tunnel, beheld
a plain, a great circle, somewhat hollowed like a vast shallow bowl:
a mile it measured from rim to rim. Once it had been green and
ﬁlled with avenues, and groves of fruitful trees, watered by streams
that ﬂowed from the mountains to a lake. But no green thing grew
there in the latter days of Saruman. The roads were paved with
stone-ﬂags, dark and hard; and beside their borders instead of trees
there marched long lines of pillars, some of marble, some of copper
and of iron, joined by heavy chains.
Many houses there were, chambers, halls, and passages, cut and
tunnelled back into the walls upon their inner side, so that all the
open circle was overlooked by countless windows and dark doors.
Thousands could dwell there, workers, servants, slaves, and warriors
with great store of arms; wolves were fed and stabled in deep dens
beneath. The plain, too, was bored and delved. Shafts were driven
deep into the ground; their upper ends were covered by low mounds
and domes of stone, so that in the moonlight the Ring of Isengard
looked like a graveyard of unquiet dead. For the ground trembled.
The shafts ran down by many slopes and spiral stairs to caverns
far under; there Saruman had treasuries, store-houses, armouries,
smithies, and great furnaces. Iron wheels revolved there endlessly,
and hammers thudded. At night plumes of vapour steamed from the

vents, lit from beneath with red light, or blue, or venomous green.
To the centre all the roads ran between their chains. There stood
a tower of marvellous shape. It was fashioned by the builders of old,
who smoothed the Ring of Isengard, and yet it seemed a thing not
made by the craft of Men, but riven from the bones of the earth in
the ancient torment of the hills. A peak and isle of rock it was,
black and gleaming hard: four mighty piers of many-sided stone were
welded into one, but near the summit they opened into gaping horns,
their pinnacles sharp as the points of spears, keen-edged as knives.
Between them was a narrow space, and there upon a ﬂoor of polished
stone, written with strange signs, a man might stand ﬁve hundred
feet above the plain. This was Orthanc, the citadel of Saruman, the
name of which had (by design or chance) a twofold meaning; for in
the Elvish speech orthanc signiﬁes Mount Fang, but in the language
of the Mark of old the Cunning Mind.
A strong place and wonderful was Isengard, and long it had been
beautiful; and there great lords had dwelt, the wardens of Gondor
upon the West, and wise men that watched the stars. But Saruman
had slowly shaped it to his shifting purposes, and made it better, as
he thought, being deceived – for all those arts and subtle devices, for
which he forsook his former wisdom, and which fondly he imagined
were his own, came but from Mordor; so that what he made was
naught, only a little copy, a child’s model or a slave’s ﬂattery, of that
vast fortress, armoury, prison, furnace of great power, Barad-duˆr, the
Dark Tower, which suffered no rival, and laughed at ﬂattery, biding
its time, secure in its pride and its immeasurable strength.
This was the stronghold of Saruman, as fame reported it; for
within living memory the men of Rohan had not passed its gates,
save perhaps a few, such as Wormtongue, who came in secret and
told no man what they saw.
Now Gandalf rode to the great pillar of the Hand, and passed it;
and as he did so the Riders saw to their wonder that the Hand
appeared no longer white. It was stained as with dried blood; and
looking closer they perceived that its nails were red. Unheeding Gan-
dalf rode on into the mist, and reluctantly they followed him. All
about them now, as if there had been a sudden ﬂood, wide pools of
water lay beside the road, ﬁlling the hollows, and rills went trickling
down among the stones.
At last Gandalf halted and beckoned to them; and they came, and
saw that beyond him the mists had cleared, and a pale sunlight shone.
The hour of noon had passed. They were come to the doors of
Isengard.
But the doors lay hurled and twisted on the ground. And all about,

stone, cracked and splintered into countless jagged shards, was scat-
tered far and wide, or piled in ruinous heaps. The great arch still
stood, but it opened now upon a rooﬂess chasm: the tunnel was laid
bare, and through the cliff-like walls on either side great rents and
breaches had been torn; their towers were beaten into dust. If the
Great Sea had risen in wrath and fallen on the hills with storm, it
could have worked no greater ruin.
The ring beyond was ﬁlled with steaming water: a bubbling caul-
dron, in which there heaved and ﬂoated a wreckage of beams and
spars, chests and casks and broken gear. Twisted and leaning pillars
reared their splintered stems above the ﬂood, but all the roads were
drowned. Far off, it seemed, half veiled in winding cloud, there
loomed the island rock. Still dark and tall, unbroken by the storm,
the tower of Orthanc stood. Pale waters lapped about its feet.
The king and all his company sat silent on their horses, marvelling,
perceiving that the power of Saruman was overthrown; but how they
could not guess. And now they turned their eyes towards the archway
and the ruined gates. There they saw close beside them a great rubble-
heap; and suddenly they were aware of two small ﬁgures lying on it
at their ease, grey-clad, hardly to be seen among the stones. There
were bottles and bowls and platters laid beside them, as if they had
just eaten well, and now rested from their labour. One seemed asleep;
the other, with crossed legs and arms behind his head, leaned back
against a broken rock and sent from his mouth long wisps and little
rings of thin blue smoke.
´
For a moment The´oden and Eomer and all his men stared at them
in wonder. Amid all the wreck of Isengard this seemed to them the
strangest sight. But before the king could speak, the small smoke-
breathing ﬁgure became suddenly aware of them, as they sat there
silent on the edge of the mist. He sprang to his feet. A young man
he looked, or like one, though not much more than half a man in
height; his head of brown curling hair was uncovered, but he was
clad in a travel-stained cloak of the same hue and shape as the com-
panions of Gandalf had worn when they rode to Edoras. He bowed
very low, putting his hand upon his breast. Then, seeming not to
observe the wizard and his friends, he turned to Eomer and the king.
´
‘Welcome, my lords, to Isengard!’ he said. ‘We are the doorward-
ens. Meriadoc, son of Saradoc is my name; and my companion, who,
alas! is overcome with weariness’ – here he gave the other a dig with
his foot – ‘is Peregrin, son of Paladin, of the House of Took. Far in
the North is our home. The Lord Saruman is within; but at the
moment he is closeted with one Wormtongue, or doubtless he would
be here to welcome such honourable guests.’

‘Doubtless he would!’ laughed Gandalf. ‘And was it Saruman that
ordered you to guard his damaged doors, and watch for the arrival
of guests, when your attention could be spared from plate and bottle?’
‘No, good sir, the matter escaped him,’ answered Merry gravely.
‘He has been much occupied. Our orders came from Treebeard, who
has taken over the management of Isengard. He commanded me
to welcome the Lord of Rohan with ﬁtting words. I have done my
best.’
‘And what about your companions? What about Legolas and me?’
cried Gimli, unable to contain himself longer. ‘You rascals, you
woolly-footed and wool-pated truants! A ﬁne hunt you have led us!
Two hundred leagues, through fen and forest, battle and death, to
rescue you! And here we ﬁnd you feasting and idling – and smoking!
Smoking! Where did you come by the weed, you villains? Hammer
and tongs! I am so torn between rage and joy, that if I do not burst,
it will be a marvel!’
‘You speak for me, Gimli,’ laughed Legolas. ‘Though I would
sooner learn how they came by the wine.’
‘One thing you have not found in your hunting, and that’s brighter
wits,’ said Pippin, opening an eye. ‘Here you ﬁnd us sitting on a ﬁeld
of victory, amid the plunder of armies, and you wonder how we came
by a few well-earned comforts!’
‘Well-earned?’ said Gimli. ‘I cannot believe that!’
The Riders laughed. ‘It cannot be doubted that we witness the
meeting of dear friends,’ said The´oden. ‘So these are the lost ones
of your company, Gandalf ? The days are fated to be ﬁlled with
marvels. Already I have seen many since I left my house; and now
here before my eyes stand yet another of the folk of legend. Are not
these the Halﬂings, that some among us call the Holbytlan?’
‘Hobbits, if you please, lord,’ said Pippin.
‘Hobbits?’ said The´oden. ‘Your tongue is strangely changed; but
the name sounds not unﬁtting so. Hobbits! No report that I have
heard does justice to the truth.’
Merry bowed; and Pippin got up and bowed low. ‘You are gra-
cious, lord; or I hope that I may so take your words,’ he said. ‘And
here is another marvel! I have wandered in many lands, since I left
my home, and never till now have I found people that knew any story
concerning hobbits.’
‘My people came out of the North long ago,’ said The´oden. ‘But
I will not deceive you: we know no tales about hobbits. All that is
said among us is that far away, over many hills and rivers, live the
halﬂing folk that dwell in holes in sand-dunes. But there are no
legends of their deeds, for it is said that they do little, and avoid the
sight of men, being able to vanish in a twinkling; and they can change

their voices to resemble the piping of birds. But it seems that more
could be said.’
‘It could indeed, lord,’ said Merry.
‘For one thing,’ said The´oden, ‘I had not heard that they spouted
smoke from their mouths.’
‘That is not surprising,’ answered Merry; ‘for it is an art which
we have not practised for more than a few generations. It was Tobold
Hornblower, of Longbottom in the Southfarthing, who ﬁrst grew the
true pipe-weed in his gardens, about the year 1070 according to our
reckoning. How old Toby came by the plant . . .’
‘You do not know your danger, The´oden,’ interrupted Gandalf.
‘These hobbits will sit on the edge of ruin and discuss the pleasures
of the table, or the small doings of their fathers, grandfathers, and
great-grandfathers, and remoter cousins to the ninth degree, if you
encourage them with undue patience. Some other time would be
more ﬁtting for the history of smoking. Where is Treebeard, Merry?’
‘Away on the north side, I believe. He went to get a drink – of
clean water. Most of the other Ents are with him, still busy at their
work – over there.’ Merry waved his hand towards the steaming lake;
and as they looked, they heard a distant rumbling and rattling, as if
an avalanche was falling from the mountain-side. Far away came a
hoom-hom, as of horns blowing triumphantly.
‘And is Orthanc then left unguarded?’ asked Gandalf.
‘There is the water,’ said Merry. ‘But Quickbeam and some others
are watching it. Not all those posts and pillars in the plain are of
Saruman’s planting. Quickbeam, I think, is by the rock, near the foot
of the stair.’
‘Yes, a tall grey Ent is there,’ said Legolas, ‘but his arms are at
his sides, and he stands as still as a door-tree.’
‘It is past noon,’ said Gandalf, ‘and we at any rate have not eaten
since early morning. Yet I wish to see Treebeard as soon as may be.
Did he leave me no message, or has plate and bottle driven it from
your mind?’
‘He left a message,’ said Merry, ‘and I was coming to it, but I
have been hindered by many other questions. I was to say that, if
the Lord of the Mark and Gandalf will ride to the northern wall they
will ﬁnd Treebeard there, and he will welcome them. I may add that
they will also ﬁnd food of the best there, it was discovered and selected
by your humble servants.’ He bowed.
Gandalf laughed. ‘That is better!’ he said. ‘Well, The´oden, will you
ride with me to ﬁnd Treebeard? We must go round about, but it is not
far. When you see Treebeard, you will learn much. For Treebeard is
Fangorn, and the eldest and chief of the Ents, and when you speak with
him you will hear the speech of the oldest of all living things.’

‘I will come with you,’ said The´oden. ‘Farewell, my hobbits! May
we meet again in my house! There you shall sit beside me and tell
me all that your hearts desire: the deeds of your grandsires, as far as
you can reckon them; and we will speak also of Tobold the Old and
his herb-lore. Farewell!’
The hobbits bowed low. ‘So that is the King of Rohan!’ said Pippin
in an undertone. ‘A ﬁne old fellow. Very polite.’

Chapter 9
F L O T S A M  A N D  J E T S A M
Gandalf and the King’s company rode away, turning eastward to
make the circuit of the ruined walls of Isengard. But Aragorn, Gimli,
and Legolas remained behind. Leaving Arod and Hasufel to stray in
search of grass, they came and sat beside the hobbits.
‘Well, well! The hunt is over, and we meet again at last, where
none of us ever thought to come,’ said Aragorn.
‘And now that the great ones have gone to discuss high matters,’
said Legolas, ‘the hunters can perhaps learn the answers to their own
small riddles. We tracked you as far as the forest, but there are still
many things that I should like to know the truth of.’
‘And there is a great deal, too, that we want to know about you,’
said Merry. ‘We have learnt a few things through Treebeard, the Old
Ent, but that is not nearly enough.’
‘All in good time,’ said Legolas. ‘We were the hunters, and you
should give an account of yourselves to us ﬁrst.’
‘Or second,’ said Gimli. ‘It would go better after a meal. I have a
sore head; and it is past mid-day. You truants might make amends
by ﬁnding us some of the plunder that you spoke of. Food and drink
would pay off some of my score against you.’
‘Then you shall have it,’ said Pippin. ‘Will you have it here, or in
more comfort in what’s left of Saruman’s guard-house – over there
under the arch? We had to picnic out here, so as to keep an eye on
the road.’
‘Less than an eye!’ said Gimli. ‘But I will not go into any orc-house;
nor touch Orcs’ meat or anything that they have mauled.’
‘We wouldn’t ask you to,’ said Merry. ‘We have had enough of
Orcs ourselves to last a life-time. But there were many other folk in
Isengard. Saruman kept enough wisdom not to trust his Orcs. He
had Men to guard his gates: some of his most faithful servants, I
suppose. Anyway they were favoured and got good provisions.’
‘And pipe-weed?’ asked Gimli.
‘No, I don’t think so,’ Merry laughed. ‘But that is another story,
which can wait until after lunch.’
‘Well let us go and have lunch then!’ said the Dwarf.
The hobbits led the way; and they passed under the arch and came
to a wide door upon the left, at the top of a stair. It opened direct
into a large chamber, with other smaller doors at the far end, and a

hearth and chimney at one side. The chamber was hewn out of the
stone; and it must once have been dark, for its windows looked out
only into the tunnel. But light came in now through the broken roof.
On the hearth wood was burning.
‘I lit a bit of ﬁre,’ said Pippin. ‘It cheered us up in the fogs. There
were few faggots about, and most of the wood we could ﬁnd was
wet. But there is a great draught in the chimney: it seems to wind
away up through the rock, and fortunately it has not been blocked.
A ﬁre is handy. I will make you some toast. The bread is three or
four days old, I am afraid.’
Aragorn and his companions sat themselves down at one end of a
long table, and the hobbits disappeared through one of the inner doors.
‘Store-room in there, and above the ﬂoods, luckily,’ said Pippin,
as they came back laden with dishes, bowls, cups, knives, and food
of various sorts.
‘And you need not turn up your nose at the provender, Master
Gimli,’ said Merry. ‘This is not orc-stuff, but man-food, as Treebeard
calls it. Will you have wine or beer? There’s a barrel inside there –
very passable. And this is ﬁrst-rate salted pork. Or I can cut you
some rashers of bacon and broil them, if you like. I am sorry there
is no green stuff: the deliveries have been rather interrupted in the
last few days! I cannot offer you anything to follow but butter and
honey for your bread. Are you content?’
‘Indeed yes,’ said Gimli. ‘The score is much reduced.’
The three were soon busy with their meal; and the two hobbits,
unabashed, set to a second time. ‘We must keep our guests company,’
they said.
‘You are full of courtesy this morning,’ laughed Legolas. ‘But
maybe, if we had not arrived, you would already have been keeping
one another company again.’
‘Maybe; and why not?’ said Pippin. ‘We had foul fare with the
Orcs, and little enough for days before that. It seems a long while
since we could eat to heart’s content.’
‘It does not seem to have done you any harm,’ said Aragorn.
‘Indeed you look in the bloom of health.’
‘Aye, you do indeed,’ said Gimli, looking them up and down over
the top of his cup. ‘Why, your hair is twice as thick and curly as when
we parted; and I would swear that you have both grown somewhat, if
that is possible for hobbits of your age. This Treebeard at any rate
has not starved you.’
‘He has not,’ said Merry. ‘But Ents only drink, and drink is not
enough for content. Treebeard’s draughts may be nourishing, but
one feels the need of something solid. And even lembas is none the
worse for a change.’

‘You have drunk of the waters of the Ents, have you?’ said Legolas.
‘Ah, then I think it is likely that Gimli’s eyes do not deceive him.
Strange songs have been sung of the draughts of Fangorn.’
‘Many strange tales have been told about that land,’ said Aragorn.
‘I have never entered it. Come, tell me more about it, and about the
Ents!’
‘Ents,’ said Pippin, ‘Ents are – well Ents are all different for one
thing. But their eyes now, their eyes are very odd.’ He tried a few
fumbling words that trailed off into silence. ‘Oh, well,’ he went on,
‘you have seen some at a distance, already – they saw you at any
rate, and reported that you were on the way – and you will see many
others, I expect, before you leave here. You must form your own
ideas.’
‘Now, now!’ said Gimli. ‘We are beginning the story in the middle.
I should like a tale in the right order, starting with that strange day
when our fellowship was broken.’
‘You shall have it, if there is time,’ said Merry. ‘But ﬁrst – if you
have ﬁnished eating – you shall ﬁll your pipes and light up. And then
for a little while we can pretend that we are all back safe at Bree
again, or in Rivendell.’
He produced a small leather bag full of tobacco. ‘We have heaps
of it,’ he said; ‘and you can all pack as much as you wish, when we
go. We did some salvage-work this morning, Pippin and I. There are
lots of things ﬂoating about. It was Pippin who found two small
barrels, washed up out of some cellar or store-house, I suppose.
When we opened them, we found they were ﬁlled with this: as ﬁne
a pipe-weed as you could wish for, and quite unspoilt.’
Gimli took some and rubbed it in his palms and sniffed it. ‘It feels
good, and it smells good,’ he said.
‘It is good!’ said Merry. ‘My dear Gimli, it is Longbottom Leaf !
There were the Hornblower brandmarks on the barrels, as plain as
plain. How it came here, I can’t imagine. For Saruman’s private use,
I fancy. I never knew that it went so far abroad. But it comes in
handy now!’
‘It would,’ said Gimli, ‘if I had a pipe to go with it. Alas, I lost
mine in Moria, or before. Is there no pipe in all your plunder?’
‘No, I am afraid not,’ said Merry. ‘We have not found any, not
even here in the guardrooms. Saruman kept this dainty to himself,
it seems. And I don’t think it would be any use knocking on the
doors of Orthanc to beg a pipe of him! We shall have to share pipes,
as good friends must at a pinch.’
‘Half a moment!’ said Pippin. Putting his hand inside the breast
of his jacket he pulled out a little soft wallet on a string. ‘I keep a
treasure or two near my skin, as precious as Rings to me. Here’s one:

my old wooden pipe. And here’s another: an unused one. I have
carried it a long way, though I don’t know why. I never really expected
to ﬁnd any pipe-weed on the journey, when my own ran out. But
now it comes in useful after all.’ He held up a small pipe with a wide
ﬂattened bowl, and handed it to Gimli. ‘Does that settle the score
between us?’ he said.
‘Settle it!’ cried Gimli. ‘Most noble hobbit, it leaves me deep in
your debt.’
‘Well, I am going back into the open air, to see what the wind
and sky are doing!’ said Legolas.
‘We will come with you,’ said Aragorn.
They went out and seated themselves upon the piled stones before
the gateway. They could see far down into the valley now; the mists
were lifting and ﬂoating away upon the breeze.
‘Now let us take our ease here for a little!’ said Aragorn. ‘We will
sit on the edge of ruin and talk, as Gandalf says, while he is busy
elsewhere. I feel a weariness such as I have seldom felt before.’ He
wrapped his grey cloak about him, hiding his mail-shirt, and stretched
out his long legs. Then he lay back and sent from his lips a thin
stream of smoke.
‘Look!’ said Pippin. ‘Strider the Ranger has come back!’
‘He has never been away,’ said Aragorn. ‘I am Strider and Du´na-
dan too, and I belong both to Gondor and the North.’
They smoked in silence for a while, and the sun shone on them;
slanting into the valley from among white clouds high in the West.
Legolas lay still, looking up at the sun and sky with steady eyes, and
singing softly to himself. At last he sat up. ‘Come now!’ he said.
‘Time wears on, and the mists are blowing away, or would if you
strange folk did not wreathe yourselves in smoke. What of the tale?’
‘Well, my tale begins with waking up in the dark and ﬁnding myself
all strung-up in an orc-camp,’ said Pippin. ‘Let me see, what is
today?’
‘The ﬁfth of March in the Shire-reckoning,’ said Aragorn. Pippin
made some calculations on his ﬁngers. ‘Only nine days ago!’ he said.*
‘It seems a year since we were caught. Well, though half of it was
like a bad dream, I reckon that three very horrible days followed.
Merry will correct me, if I forget anything important: I am not going
into details: the whips and the ﬁlth and stench and all that; it does
not bear remembering.’ With that he plunged into an account of
Boromir’s last ﬁght and the orc-march from Emyn Muil to the Forest.
* Every month in the Shire-calendar had 30 days.

The others nodded as the various points were ﬁtted in with their
guesses.
‘Here are some treasures that you let fall,’ said Aragorn. ‘You will
be glad to have them back.’ He loosened his belt from under his
cloak, and took from it the two sheathed knives.
‘Well!’ said Merry. ‘I never expected to see those again! I marked
a few orcs with mine; but Uglu´k took them from us. How he glared!
At ﬁrst I thought he was going to stab me, but he threw the things
away as if they burned him.’
‘And here also is your brooch, Pippin,’ said Aragorn. ‘I have kept
it safe, for it is a very precious thing.’
‘I know,’ said Pippin. ‘It was a wrench to let it go; but what else
could I do?’
‘Nothing else,’ answered Aragorn. ‘One who cannot cast away a
treasure at need is in fetters. You did rightly.’
‘The cutting of the bands on your wrists, that was smart work!’
said Gimli. ‘Luck served you there; but you seized your chance with
both hands, one might say.’
‘And set us a pretty riddle,’ said Legolas. ‘I wondered if you had
grown wings!’
‘Unfortunately not,’ said Pippin. ‘But you did not know about
Grishna´kh.’ He shuddered and said no more, leaving Merry to tell
of those last horrible moments: the pawing hands, the hot breath,
and the dreadful strength of Grishna´kh’s hairy arms.
‘All this about the Orcs of Barad-duˆr, Lugbu´rz as they call it,
makes me uneasy,’ said Aragorn. ‘The Dark Lord already knew too
much, and his servants also; and Grishna´kh evidently sent some
message across the River after the quarrel. The Red Eye will be
looking towards Isengard. But Saruman at any rate is in a cleft stick
of his own cutting.’
‘Yes, whichever side wins, his outlook is poor,’ said Merry. ‘Things
began to go all wrong for him from the moment his Orcs set foot in
Rohan.’
‘We caught a glimpse of the old villain, or so Gandalf hints,’ said
Gimli. ‘On the edge of the Forest.’
‘When was that?’ asked Pippin.
‘Five nights ago,’ said Aragorn.
‘Let me see,’ said Merry: ‘ﬁve nights ago – now we come to a part
of the story you know nothing about. We met Treebeard that morning
after the battle; and that night we were at Wellinghall, one of his
ent-houses. The next morning we went to Entmoot, a gathering of
Ents, that is, and the queerest thing I have ever seen in my life. It
lasted all that day and the next; and we spent the nights with an Ent
called Quickbeam. And then late in the afternoon in the third day

of their moot, the Ents suddenly blew up. It was amazing. The Forest
had felt as tense as if a thunderstorm was brewing inside it: then all
at once it exploded. I wish you could have heard their song as they
marched.’
‘If Saruman had heard it, he would be a hundred miles away by
now, even if he had had to run on his own legs,’ said Pippin.
‘Though Isengard be strong and hard, as cold as stone and bare as
bone,
We go, we go, we go to war, to hew the stone and break the door!
There was very much more. A great deal of the song had no words,
and was like a music of horns and drums. It was very exciting. But
I thought it was only marching music and no more, just a song –
until I got here. I know better now.’
‘We came down over the last ridge into Nan Curunı´r, after night
had fallen,’ Merry continued. ‘It was then that I ﬁrst had the feeling
that the Forest itself was moving behind us. I thought I was dreaming
an entish dream, but Pippin had noticed it too. We were both fright-
ened; but we did not ﬁnd out more about it until later.
‘It was the Huorns, or so the Ents call them in ‘‘short language’’.
Treebeard won’t say much about them, but I think they are Ents
that have become almost like trees, at least to look at. They stand
here and there in the wood or under its eaves, silent, watching end-
lessly over the trees; but deep in the darkest dales there are hundreds
and hundreds of them, I believe.
‘There is a great power in them, and they seem able to wrap
themselves in shadow: it is difﬁcult to see them moving. But they
do. They can move very quickly, if they are angry. You stand still
looking at the weather, maybe, or listening to the rustling of the wind,
and then suddenly you ﬁnd that you are in the middle of a wood
with great groping trees all around you. They still have voices, and
can speak with the Ents – that is why they are called Huorns, Tree-
beard says – but they have become queer and wild. Dangerous. I
should be terriﬁed of meeting them, if there were no true Ents about
to look after them.
‘Well, in the early night we crept down a long ravine into the
upper end of the Wizard’s Vale, the Ents with all their rustling Huorns
behind. We could not see them, of course, but the whole air was full
of creaking. It was very dark, a cloudy night. They moved at a great
speed as soon as they had left the hills, and made a noise like a
rushing wind. The Moon did not appear through the clouds, and
not long after midnight there was a tall wood all round the north
side of Isengard. There was no sign of enemies nor of any challenge.

There was a light gleaming from a high window in the tower, that
was all.
‘Treebeard and a few more Ents crept on, right round to within
sight of the great gates. Pippin and I were with him. We were sitting
on Treebeard’s shoulders, and I could feel the quivering tenseness
in him. But even when they are roused, Ents can be very cautious
and patient. They stood still as carved stones, breathing and listening.
‘Then all at once there was a tremendous stir. Trumpets blared,
and the walls of Isengard echoed. We thought that we had been
discovered, and that battle was going to begin. But nothing of the
sort. All Saruman’s people were marching away. I don’t know much
about this war, or about the Horsemen of Rohan, but Saruman seems
to have meant to ﬁnish off the king and all his men with one ﬁnal
blow. He emptied Isengard. I saw the enemy go: endless lines of
marching Orcs; and troops of them mounted on great wolves. And
there were battalions of Men, too. Many of them carried torches,
and in the ﬂare I could see their faces. Most of them were ordinary
men, rather tall and dark-haired, and grim but not particularly evil-
looking. But there were some others that were horrible: man-high,
but with goblin-faces, sallow, leering, squint-eyed. Do you know,
they reminded me at once of that Southerner at Bree; only he was
not so obviously orc-like as most of these were.’
‘I thought of him too,’ said Aragorn. ‘We had many of these
half-orcs to deal with at Helm’s Deep. It seems plain now that that
Southerner was a spy of Saruman’s; but whether he was working
with the Black Riders, or for Saruman alone, I do not know. It is
difﬁcult with these evil folk to know when they are in league, and
when they are cheating one another.’
‘Well, of all sorts together, there must have been ten thousand at
the very least,’ said Merry. ‘They took an hour to pass out of the
gates. Some went off down the highway to the Fords, and some
turned away and went eastward. A bridge has been built down there,
about a mile away, where the river runs in a very deep channel. You
could see it now, if you stood up. They were all singing with harsh
voices, and laughing, making a hideous din. I thought things looked
very black for Rohan. But Treebeard did not move. He said: ‘‘My
business is with Isengard tonight, with rock and stone.’’
‘But, though I could not see what was happening in the dark, I
believe that Huorns began to move south, as soon as the gates were
shut again. Their business was with Orcs I think. They were far down
the valley in the morning; or at any rate there was a shadow there
that one couldn’t see through.
‘As soon as Saruman had sent off all his army, our turn came.
Treebeard put us down, and went up to the gates, and began ham-

mering on the doors, and calling for Saruman. There was no answer,
except arrows and stones from the walls. But arrows are no use
against Ents. They hurt them, of course, and infuriate them: like
stinging ﬂies. But an Ent can be stuck as full of orc-arrows as a
pin-cushion, and take no serious harm. They cannot be poisoned,
for one thing; and their skin seems to be very thick, and tougher than
bark. It takes a very heavy axe-stroke to wound them seriously. They
don’t like axes. But there would have to be a great many axe-men
to one Ent: a man that hacks once at an Ent never gets a chance of
a second blow. A punch from an Ent-ﬁst crumples up iron like thin
tin.
‘When Treebeard had got a few arrows in him, he began to warm
up, to get positively ‘‘hasty’’, as he would say. He let out a great
hoom-hom, and a dozen more Ents came striding up. An angry Ent
is terrifying. Their ﬁngers, and their toes, just freeze on to rock; and
they tear it up like bread-crust. It was like watching the work of great
tree-roots in a hundred years, all packed into a few moments.
‘They pushed, pulled, tore, shook, and hammered; and clang-bang,
crash-crack, in ﬁve minutes they had these huge gates just lying in
ruin; and some were already beginning to eat into the walls, like
rabbits in a sand-pit. I don’t know what Saruman thought was hap-
pening; but anyway he did not know how to deal with it. His wizardry
may have been falling off lately, of course; but anyway I think he has
not much grit, not much plain courage alone in a tight place without
a lot of slaves and machines and things, if you know what I mean.
Very different from old Gandalf. I wonder if his fame was not all
along mainly due to his cleverness in settling at Isengard.’
‘No,’ said Aragorn. ‘Once he was as great as his fame made him.
His knowledge was deep, his thought was subtle, and his hands mar-
vellously skilled; and he had a power over the minds of others. The
wise he could persuade, and the smaller folk he could daunt. That
power he certainly still keeps. There are not many in Middle-earth
that I should say were safe, if they were left alone to talk with
him, even now when he has suffered a defeat. Gandalf, Elrond, and
Galadriel, perhaps, now that his wickedness has been laid bare, but
very few others.’
‘The Ents are safe,’ said Pippin. ‘He seems at one time to have
got round them, but never again. And anyway he did not understand
them; and he made the great mistake of leaving them out of his
calculations. He had no plan for them, and there was no time to
make any, once they had set to work. As soon as our attack began,
the few remaining rats in Isengard started bolting through every hole
that the Ents made. The Ents let the Men go, after they had ques-
tioned them, two or three dozen only down at this end. I don’t think

many orc-folk, of any size, escaped. Not from the Huorns: there was
a wood full of them all round Isengard by that time, as well as those
that had gone down the valley.
‘When the Ents had reduced a large part of the southern walls to
rubbish, and what was left of his people had bolted and deserted
him, Saruman ﬂed in a panic. He seems to have been at the gates
when we arrived: I expect he came to watch his splendid army march
out. When the Ents broke their way in, he left in a hurry. They did
not spot him at ﬁrst. But the night had opened out, and there was a
great light of stars, quite enough for Ents to see by, and suddenly
Quickbeam gave a cry ‘‘The tree-killer, the tree-killer!’’ Quickbeam
is a gentle creature, but he hates Saruman all the more ﬁercely for
that: his people suffered cruelly from orc-axes. He leapt down the
path from the inner gate, and he can move like a wind when he is
roused. There was a pale ﬁgure hurrying away in and out of the
shadows of the pillars, and it had nearly reached the stairs to the
tower-door. But it was a near thing. Quickbeam was so hot after him,
that he was within a step or two of being caught and strangled when
he slipped in through the door.
‘When Saruman was safe back in Orthanc, it was not long before
he set some of his precious machinery to work. By that time there
were many Ents inside Isengard: some had followed Quickbeam, and
others had burst in from the north and east; they were roaming about
and doing a great deal of damage. Suddenly up came ﬁres and foul
fumes: the vents and shafts all over the plain began to spout and
belch. Several of the Ents got scorched and blistered. One of them,
Beechbone I think he was called, a very tall handsome Ent, got caught
in a spray of some liquid ﬁre and burned like a torch: a horrible sight.
‘That sent them mad. I thought that they had been really roused
before; but I was wrong. I saw what it was like at last. It was stagger-
ing. They roared and boomed and trumpeted, until stones began to
crack and fall at the mere noise of them. Merry and I lay on the
ground and stuffed our cloaks into our ears. Round and round the
rock of Orthanc the Ents went striding and storming like a howling
gale, breaking pillars, hurling avalanches of boulders down the shafts,
tossing up huge slabs of stone into the air like leaves. The tower was
in the middle of a spinning whirlwind. I saw iron posts and blocks
of masonry go rocketing up hundreds of feet, and smash against the
windows of Orthanc. But Treebeard kept his head. He had not had
any burns, luckily. He did not want his folk to hurt themselves in
their fury, and he did not want Saruman to escape out of some hole
in the confusion. Many of the Ents were hurling themselves against
the Orthanc-rock; but that defeated them. It is very smooth and hard.
Some wizardry is in it, perhaps, older and stronger than Saruman’s.

Anyway they could not get a grip on it, or make a crack in it; and
they were bruising and wounding themselves against it.
‘So Treebeard went out into the ring and shouted. His enormous
voice rose above all the din. There was a dead silence, suddenly. In
it we heard a shrill laugh from a high window in the tower. That had
a queer effect on the Ents. They had been boiling over; now they
became cold, grim as ice, and quiet. They left the plain and gathered
round Treebeard, standing quite still. He spoke to them for a little
in their own language; I think he was telling them of a plan he had
made in his old head long before. Then they just faded silently away
in the grey light. Day was dawning by that time.
‘They set a watch on the tower, I believe, but the watchers were
so well hidden in shadows and kept so still, that I could not see them.
The others went away north. All that day they were busy, out of
sight. Most of the time we were left alone. It was a dreary day; and
we wandered about a bit, though we kept out of the view of the
windows of Orthanc, as much as we could: they stared at us so
threateningly. A good deal of the time we spent looking for something
to eat. And also we sat and talked, wondering what was happening
away south in Rohan, and what had become of all the rest of our
Company. Every now and then we could hear in the distance the
rattle and fall of stone, and thudding noises echoing in the hills.
‘In the afternoon we walked round the circle, and went to have a
look at what was going on. There was a great shadowy wood of
Huorns at the head of the valley, and another round the northern
wall. We did not dare to go in. But there was a rending, tearing noise
of work going on inside. Ents and Huorns were digging great pits
and trenches, and making great pools and dams, gathering all the
waters of the Isen and every other spring and stream that they could
ﬁnd. We left them to it.
‘At dusk Treebeard came back to the gate. He was humming and
booming to himself, and seemed pleased. He stood and stretched his
great arms and legs and breathed deep. I asked him if he was tired.
‘ ‘‘Tired?’’ he said, ‘‘tired? Well no, not tired, but stiff. I need a
good draught of Entwash. We have worked hard; we have done more
stone-cracking and earth-gnawing today than we have done in many
a long year before. But it is nearly ﬁnished. When night falls do not
linger near this gate or in the old tunnel! Water may come through
– and it will be foul water for a while, until all the ﬁlth of Saruman
is washed away. Then Isen can run clean again.’’ He began to pull
down a bit more of the walls, in a leisurely sort of way, just to amuse
himself.
‘We were just wondering where it would be safe to lie and get
some sleep, when the most amazing thing of all happened. There

was the sound of a rider coming swiftly up the road. Merry and I lay
quiet, and Treebeard hid himself in the shadows under the arch.
Suddenly a great horse came striding up, like a ﬂash of silver. It was
already dark, but I could see the rider’s face clearly: it seemed to
shine, and all his clothes were white. I just sat up, staring, with my
mouth open. I tried to call out, and couldn’t.
‘There was no need. He halted just by us and looked down at us.
‘‘Gandalf !’’ I said at last, but my voice was only a whisper. Did he
say: ‘‘Hullo, Pippin! This is a pleasant surprise!’’? No, indeed! He
said: ‘‘Get up, you tom-fool of a Took! Where, in the name of wonder,
in all this ruin is Treebeard? I want him. Quick!’’
‘Treebeard heard his voice and came out of the shadows at once;
and there was a strange meeting. I was surprised, because neither of
them seemed surprised at all. Gandalf obviously expected to ﬁnd
Treebeard here; and Treebeard might almost have been loitering
about near the gates on purpose to meet him. Yet we had told the
old Ent all about Moria. But then I remembered a queer look he
gave us at the time. I can only suppose that he had seen Gandalf or
had some news of him, but would not say anything in a hurry. ‘‘Don’t
be hasty’’ is his motto; but nobody, not even Elves, will say much
about Gandalf ’s movements when he is not there.
‘ ‘‘Hoom! Gandalf !’’ said Treebeard. ‘‘I am glad you have come.
Wood and water, stock and stone, I can master; but there is a Wizard
to manage here.’’
‘ ‘‘Treebeard,’’ said Gandalf. ‘‘I need your help. You have done
much, but I need more. I have about ten thousand Orcs to manage.’’
‘Then those two went off and had a council together in some
corner. It must have seemed very hasty to Treebeard, for Gandalf
was in a tremendous hurry, and was already talking at a great pace,
before they passed out of hearing. They were only away a matter of
minutes, perhaps a quarter of an hour. Then Gandalf came back to
us, and he seemed relieved, almost merry. He did say he was glad
to see us, then.
‘ ‘‘But Gandalf,’’ I cried, ‘‘where have you been? And have you
seen the others?’’
‘ ‘‘Wherever I have been, I am back,’’ he answered in the genuine
Gandalf manner. ‘‘Yes, I have seen some of the others. But news
must wait. This is a perilous night, and I must ride fast. But the
dawn may be brighter; and if so, we shall meet again. Take care of
yourselves, and keep away from Orthanc! Good-bye!’’
‘Treebeard was very thoughtful after Gandalf had gone. He had
evidently learnt a lot in a short time and was digesting it. He looked
at us and said: ‘‘Hm, well, I ﬁnd you are not such hasty folk as I
thought. You said much less than you might, and no more than you

should. Hm, this is a bundle of news and no mistake! Well, now
Treebeard must get busy again.’’
‘Before he went, we got a little news out of him; and it did not
cheer us up at all. But for the moment we thought more about you
three than about Frodo and Sam, or about poor Boromir. For we
gathered that there was a great battle going on, or soon would be,
and that you were in it, and might never come out of it.
‘ ‘‘Huorns will help,’’ said Treebeard. Then he went away and we
did not see him again until this morning.
‘It was deep night. We lay on top of a pile of stone, and could see
nothing beyond it. Mist or shadows blotted out everything like a great
blanket all round us. The air seemed hot and heavy; and it was full
of rustlings, creakings, and a murmur like voices passing. I think that
hundreds more of the Huorns must have been passing by to help in
the battle. Later there was a great rumble of thunder away south,
and ﬂashes of lightning far away across Rohan. Every now and then
we could see mountain-peaks, miles and miles away, stab out sud-
denly, black and white, and then vanish. And behind us there were
noises like thunder in hills, but different. At times the whole valley
echoed.
‘It must have been about midnight when the Ents broke the dams
and poured all the gathered waters through a gap in the northern
wall, down into Isengard. The Huorn-dark had passed, and the thun-
der had rolled away. The Moon was sinking behind the western
mountains.
‘Isengard began to ﬁll up with black creeping streams and pools.
They glittered in the last light of the Moon, as they spread over the
plain. Every now and then the waters found their way down into
some shaft or spouthole. Great white steams hissed up. Smoke rose
in billows. There were explosions and gusts of ﬁre. One great coil of
vapour went whirling up, twisting round and round Orthanc, until
it looked like a tall peak of cloud, ﬁery underneath and moonlit above.
And still more water poured in, until at last Isengard looked like a
huge ﬂat saucepan, all steaming and bubbling.’
‘We saw a cloud of smoke and steam from the south last night,
when we came to the mouth of Nan Curunı´r,’ said Aragorn. ‘We
feared that Saruman was brewing some new devilry for us.’
‘Not he!’ said Pippin. ‘He was probably choking and not laughing
any more. By the morning, yesterday morning, the water had sunk
down into all the holes, and there was a dense fog. We took refuge
in that guardroom over there; and we had rather a fright. The lake
began to overﬂow and pour out through the old tunnel, and the water
was rapidly rising up the steps. We thought we were going to get

caught like Orcs in a hole; but we found a winding stair at the back
of the store-room that brought us out on top of the arch. It was a
squeeze to get out, as the passages had been cracked and half blocked
with fallen stone near the top. There we sat high up above the ﬂoods
and watched the drowning of Isengard. The Ents kept on pouring in
more water, till all the ﬁres were quenched and every cave ﬁlled. The
fogs slowly gathered together and steamed up into a huge umbrella
of cloud: it must have been a mile high. In the evening there was a
great rainbow over the eastern hills; and then the sunset was blotted
out by a thick drizzle on the mountain-sides. It all went very quiet.
A few wolves howled mournfully, far away. The Ents stopped the
inﬂow in the night, and sent the Isen back into its old course. And
that was the end of it all.
‘Since then the water has been sinking again. There must be outlets
somewhere from the caves underneath, I think. If Saruman peeps
out of any of his windows, it must look an untidy, dreary mess. We
felt very lonely. Not even a visible Ent to talk to in all the ruin; and
no news. We spent the night up on top there above the arch, and it
was cold and damp and we did not sleep. We had a feeling that
anything might happen at any minute. Saruman is still in his tower.
There was a noise in the night like a wind coming up the valley. I
think the Ents and Huorns that had been away came back then; but
where they have all gone to now, I don’t know. It was a misty, moisty
morning when we climbed down and looked round again, and nobody
was about. And that is about all there is to tell. It seems almost
peaceful now after all the turmoil. And safer too, somehow, since
Gandalf came back. I could sleep!’
They all fell silent for a while. Gimli re-ﬁlled his pipe. ‘There is
one thing I wonder about,’ he said as he lit it with his ﬂint and tinder:
‘Wormtongue. You told The´oden he was with Saruman. How did
he get there?’
‘Oh yes, I forgot about him,’ said Pippin. ‘He did not get here till
this morning. We had just lit the ﬁre and had some breakfast when
Treebeard appeared again. We heard him hooming and calling our
names outside.
‘ ‘‘I have just come round to see how you are faring, my lads,’’ he
said; ‘‘and to give you some news. Huorns have come back. All’s well;
aye very well indeed!’’ he laughed, and slapped his thighs. ‘‘No more
Orcs in Isengard, no more axes! And there will be folk coming up from
the South before the day is old; some that you may be glad to see.’’
‘He had hardly said that, when we heard the sound of hoofs on
the road. We rushed out before the gates, and I stood and stared,

half expecting to see Strider and Gandalf come riding up at the head
of an army. But out of the mist there rode a man on an old tired
horse; and he looked a queer twisted sort of creature himself. There
was no one else. When he came out of the mist and suddenly saw
all the ruin and wreckage in front of him, he sat and gaped, and his
face went almost green. He was so bewildered that he did not seem
to notice us at ﬁrst. When he did, he gave a cry, and tried to turn
his horse round and ride off. But Treebeard took three strides, put
out a long arm, and lifted him out of the saddle. His horse bolted in
terror, and he grovelled on the ground. He said he was Grı´ma, friend
and counsellor of the king, and had been sent with important mes-
sages from The´oden to Saruman.
‘ ‘‘No one else would dare to ride through the open land, so full
of foul Orcs,’’ he said, ‘‘so I was sent. And I have had a perilous
journey, and I am hungry and weary. I ﬂed far north out of my way,
pursued by wolves.’’
‘I caught the sidelong looks he gave to Treebeard, and I said to
myself ‘‘liar’’. Treebeard looked at him in his long slow way for
several minutes, till the wretched man was squirming on the ﬂoor.
Then at last he said: ‘‘Ha, hm, I was expecting you, Master Worm-
tongue.’’ The man started at that name. ‘‘Gandalf got here ﬁrst. So
I know as much about you as I need, and I know what to do with
you. Put all the rats in one trap, said Gandalf; and I will. I am the
master of Isengard now, but Saruman is locked in his tower; and you
can go there and give him all the messages that you can think of.’’
‘ ‘‘Let me go, let me go!’’ said Wormtongue. ‘‘I know the way.’’
‘ ‘‘You knew the way, I don’t doubt,’’ said Treebeard. ‘‘But things
have changed here a little. Go and see!’’
‘He let Wormtongue go, and he limped off through the arch, with
us close behind, until he came inside the ring and could see all the
ﬂoods that lay between him and Orthanc. Then he turned to us.
‘ ‘‘Let me go away!’’ he whined. ‘‘Let me go away! My messages
are useless now.’’
‘ ‘‘They are indeed,’’ said Treebeard. ‘‘But you have only two
choices: to stay with me until Gandalf and your master arrive; or to
cross the water. Which will you have?’’
‘The man shivered at the mention of his master, and put a foot
into the water; but he drew back. ‘‘I cannot swim,’’ he said.
‘ ‘‘The water is not deep,’’ said Treebeard. ‘‘It is dirty, but that
will not harm you, Master Wormtongue. In you go now!’’
‘With that the wretch ﬂoundered off into the ﬂood. It rose up
nearly to his neck before he got too far away for me to see him. The
last I saw of him was clinging to some old barrel or piece of wood.
But Treebeard waded after him, and watched his progress.

‘ ‘‘Well, he has gone in,’’ he said when he returned. ‘‘I saw him
crawling up the steps like a draggled rat. There is someone in the
tower still: a hand came out and pulled him in. So there he is, and
I hope the welcome is to his liking. Now I must go and wash myself
clean of the slime. I’ll be away up on the north side, if anyone wants
to see me. There is no clean water down here ﬁt for an Ent to drink,
or to bathe in. So I will ask you two lads to keep a watch at the gate
for the folk that are coming. There’ll be the Lord of the Fields of
Rohan, mark you! You must welcome him as well as you know how:
his men have fought a great ﬁght with the Orcs. Maybe, you know
the right fashion of Men’s words for such a lord, better than Ents.
There have been many lords in the green ﬁelds in my time, and I
have never learned their speech or their names. They will be wanting
man-food, and you know all about that, I guess. So ﬁnd what you
think is ﬁt for a king to eat, if you can.’’ And that is the end of the
story. Though I should like to know who this Wormtongue is. Was
he really the king’s counsellor?’
‘He was,’ said Aragorn; ‘and also Saruman’s spy and servant in
Rohan. Fate has not been kinder to him than he deserves. The sight
of the ruin of all that he thought so strong and magniﬁcent must
have been almost punishment enough. But I fear that worse awaits
him.’
‘Yes, I don’t suppose Treebeard sent him to Orthanc out of kind-
ness,’ said Merry. ‘He seemed rather grimly delighted with the
business, and was laughing to himself when he went to get his bathe
and drink. We spent a busy time after that, searching the ﬂotsam, and
rummaging about. We found two or three store-rooms in different
places nearby, above the ﬂood-level. But Treebeard sent some Ents
down, and they carried off a great deal of the stuff.
‘ ‘‘We want man-food for twenty-ﬁve,’’ the Ents said, so you can
see that somebody had counted your company carefully before you
arrived. You three were evidently meant to go with the great people.
But you would not have fared any better. We kept as good as we
sent, I promise you. Better, because we sent no drink.
‘ ‘‘What about drink?’’ I said to the Ents.
‘ ‘‘There is water of Isen,’’ they said, ‘‘and that is good enough
for Ents and Men.’’ But I hope that the Ents may have found time
to brew some of their draughts from the mountain-springs, and we
shall see Gandalf ’s beard curling when he returns. After the Ents
had gone, we felt tired, and hungry. But we did not grumble – our
labours had been well rewarded. It was through our search for man-
food that Pippin discovered the prize of all the ﬂotsam, those Horn-
blower barrels. ‘‘Pipe-weed is better after food,’’ said Pippin; that is
how the situation arose.’

‘We understand it all perfectly now,’ said Gimli.
‘All except one thing,’ said Aragorn: ‘leaf from the Southfarthing
in Isengard. The more I consider it, the more curious I ﬁnd it. I have
never been in Isengard, but I have journeyed in this land, and I
know well the empty countries that lie between Rohan and the Shire.
Neither goods nor folk have passed that way for many a long year,
not openly. Saruman had secret dealings with someone in the Shire,
I guess. Wormtongues may be found in other houses than King
The´oden’s. Was there a date on the barrels?’
‘Yes,’ said Pippin. ‘It was the 1417 crop, that is last year’s; no, the
year before, of course, now: a good year.’
‘Ah well, whatever evil was afoot is over now, I hope; or else it is
beyond our reach at present,’ said Aragorn. ‘Yet I think I shall men-
tion it to Gandalf, small matter though it may seem among his great
affairs.’
‘I wonder what he is doing,’ said Merry. ‘The afternoon is getting
on. Let us go and look round! You can enter Isengard now at any
rate, Strider, if you want to. But it is not a very cheerful sight.’

Chapter 10
T H E  V O I C E  O F  S A R U M A N
They passed through the ruined tunnel and stood upon a heap of
stones, gazing at the dark rock of Orthanc, and its many windows,
a menace still in the desolation that lay all about it. The waters had
now nearly all subsided. Here and there gloomy pools remained,
covered with scum and wreckage; but most of the wide circle was
bare again, a wilderness of slime and tumbled rock, pitted with black-
ened holes, and dotted with posts and pillars leaning drunkenly this
way and that. At the rim of the shattered bowl there lay vast mounds
and slopes, like the shingles cast up by a great storm; and beyond
them the green and tangled valley ran up into the long ravine between
the dark arms of the mountains. Across the waste they saw riders
picking their way; they were coming from the north side, and already
they were drawing near to Orthanc.
‘There is Gandalf, and The´oden and his men!’ said Legolas. ‘Let
us go and meet them!’
‘Walk warily!’ said Merry. ‘There are loose slabs that may tilt up
and throw you down into a pit, if you don’t take care.’
They followed what was left of the road from the gates to Orthanc,
going slowly, for the ﬂag-stones were cracked and slimed. The riders,
seeing them approach, halted under the shadow of the rock and
waited for them. Gandalf rode forward to meet them.
‘Well, Treebeard and I have had some interesting discussions, and
made a few plans,’ he said; ‘and we have all had some much-needed
rest. Now we must be going on again. I hope you companions have
all rested, too, and refreshed yourselves?’
‘We have,’ said Merry. ‘But our discussions began and ended in
smoke. Still we feel less ill-disposed towards Saruman than we did.’
‘Do you indeed?’ said Gandalf. ‘Well, I do not. I have now a last
task to do before I go: I must pay Saruman a farewell visit. Dangerous,
and probably useless; but it must be done. Those of you who wish
may come with me – but beware! And do not jest! This is not the
time for it.’
‘I will come,’ said Gimli. ‘I wish to see him and learn if he really
looks like you.’
‘And how will you learn that, Master Dwarf ?’ said Gandalf.
‘Saruman could look like me in your eyes, if it suited his purpose
with you. And are you yet wise enough to detect all his counterfeits?

Well, we shall see, perhaps. He may be shy of showing himself before
many different eyes together. But I have ordered all the Ents to
remove themselves from sight, so perhaps we shall persuade him to
come out.’
‘What’s the danger?’ asked Pippin. ‘Will he shoot at us, and pour
ﬁre out of the windows; or can he put a spell on us from a distance?’
‘The last is most likely, if you ride to his door with a light heart,’
said Gandalf. ‘But there is no knowing what he can do, or may choose
to try. A wild beast cornered is not safe to approach. And Saruman
has powers you do not guess. Beware of his voice!’
They came now to the foot of Orthanc. It was black, and the rock
gleamed as if it were wet. The many faces of the stone had sharp
edges as though they had been newly chiselled. A few scorings, and
small ﬂake-like splinters near the base, were all the marks that it bore
of the fury of the Ents.
On the eastern side, in the angle of two piers, there was a great
door, high above the ground; and over it was a shuttered window,
opening upon a balcony hedged with iron bars. Up to the threshold
of the door there mounted a ﬂight of twenty-seven broad stairs, hewn
by some unknown art of the same black stone. This was the only
entrance to the tower; but many tall windows were cut with deep
embrasures in the climbing walls: far up they peered like little eyes
in the sheer faces of the horns.
At the foot of the stairs Gandalf and the king dismounted. ‘I will
go up,’ said Gandalf. ‘I have been in Orthanc and I know my peril.’
‘And I too will go up,’ said the king. ‘I am old, and fear no peril
any more. I wish to speak with the enemy who has done me so much
´
wrong. Eomer shall come with me, and see that my aged feet do not
falter.’
‘As you will,’ said Gandalf. ‘Aragorn shall come with me. Let the
others await us at the foot of the stairs. They will hear and see enough,
if there is anything to hear or see.’
‘Nay!’ said Gimli. ‘Legolas and I wish for a closer view. We alone
here represent our kindreds. We also will come behind.’
‘Come then!’ said Gandalf, and with that he climbed the steps,
and The´oden went beside him.
The Riders of Rohan sat uneasily upon their horses, on either side
of the stair, and looked up darkly at the great tower, fearing what
might befall their lord. Merry and Pippin sat on the bottom step,
feeling both unimportant and unsafe.
‘Half a sticky mile from here to the gate!’ muttered Pippin. ‘I wish
I could slip off back to the guardroom unnoticed! What did we come
for? We are not wanted.’

Gandalf stood before the door of Orthanc and beat on it with his
staff. It rang with a hollow sound. ‘Saruman, Saruman!’ he cried in
a loud commanding voice. ‘Saruman come forth!’
For some time there was no answer. At last the window above the
door was unbarred, but no ﬁgure could be seen at its dark opening.
‘Who is it?’ said a voice. ‘What do you wish?’
The´oden started. ‘I know that voice,’ he said, ‘and I curse the day
when I ﬁrst listened to it.’
‘Go and fetch Saruman, since you have become his footman,
Grı´ma Wormtongue!’ said Gandalf. ‘And do not waste our time!’
The window closed. They waited. Suddenly another voice spoke,
low and melodious, its very sound an enchantment. Those who
listened unwarily to that voice could seldom report the words that
they heard; and if they did, they wondered, for little power remained
in them. Mostly they remembered only that it was a delight to hear
the voice speaking, all that it said seemed wise and reasonable, and
desire awoke in them by swift agreement to seem wise themselves.
When others spoke they seemed harsh and uncouth by contrast; and
if they gainsaid the voice, anger was kindled in the hearts of those
under the spell. For some the spell lasted only while the voice spoke
to them, and when it spoke to another they smiled, as men do who
see through a juggler’s trick while others gape at it. For many the
sound of the voice alone was enough to hold them enthralled; but
for those whom it conquered the spell endured when they were far
away, and ever they heard that soft voice whispering and urging them.
But none were unmoved; none rejected its pleas and its commands
without an effort of mind and will, so long as its master had control
of it.
‘Well?’ it said now with gentle question. ‘Why must you disturb
my rest? Will you give me no peace at all by night or day?’ Its tone
was that of a kindly heart aggrieved by injuries undeserved.
They looked up, astonished, for they had heard no sound of his
coming; and they saw a ﬁgure standing at the rail, looking down
upon them: an old man, swathed in a great cloak, the colour of which
was not easy to tell, for it changed if they moved their eyes or if he
stirred. His face was long, with a high forehead, he had deep darkling
eyes, hard to fathom, though the look that they now bore was grave
and benevolent, and a little weary. His hair and beard were white,
but strands of black still showed about his lips and ears.
‘Like, and yet unlike,’ muttered Gimli.
‘But come now,’ said the soft voice. ‘Two at least of you I know
by name. Gandalf I know too well to have much hope that he seeks
help or counsel here. But you, The´oden Lord of the Mark of Rohan,
are declared by your noble devices, and still more by the fair counten-

ance of the House of Eorl. O worthy son of Thengel the Thrice-
renowned! Why have you not come before, and as a friend? Much
have I desired to see you, mightiest king of western lands, and especi-
ally in these latter years, to save you from the unwise and evil counsels
that beset you! Is it yet too late? Despite the injuries that have been
done to me, in which the men of Rohan, alas! have had some part,
still I would save you, and deliver you from the ruin that draws nigh
inevitably, if you ride upon this road which you have taken. Indeed
I alone can aid you now.’
The´oden opened his mouth as if to speak, but he said nothing.
He looked up at the face of Saruman with its dark solemn eyes bent
down upon him, and then to Gandalf at his side; and he seemed to
hesitate. Gandalf made no sign; but stood silent as stone, as one
waiting patiently for some call that has not yet come. The Riders
stirred at ﬁrst, murmuring with approval of the words of Saruman;
and then they too were silent, as men spell-bound. It seemed to them
that Gandalf had never spoken so fair and ﬁttingly to their lord.
Rough and proud now seemed all his dealings with The´oden. And
over their hearts crept a shadow, the fear of a great danger: the end
of the Mark in a darkness to which Gandalf was driving them, while
Saruman stood beside a door of escape, holding it half open so that
a ray of light came through. There was a heavy silence.
It was Gimli the dwarf who broke in suddenly. ‘The words of this
wizard stand on their heads,’ he growled, gripping the handle of his
axe. ‘In the language of Orthanc help means ruin, and saving means
slaying, that is plain. But we do not come here to beg.’
‘Peace!’ said Saruman, and for a ﬂeeting moment his voice was
less suave, and a light ﬂickered in his eyes and was gone. ‘I do not
speak to you yet, Gimli Glo´ in’s son,’ he said. ‘Far away is your home
and small concern of yours are the troubles of this land. But it was
not by design of your own that you became embroiled in them, and
so I will not blame such part as you have played – a valiant one, I
doubt not. But I pray you, allow me ﬁrst to speak with the King of
Rohan, my neighbour, and once my friend.
‘What have you to say, The´oden King? Will you have peace with
me, and all the aid that my knowledge, founded in long years, can
bring? Shall we make our counsels together against evil days, and
repair our injuries with such good will that our estates shall both
come to fairer ﬂower than ever before?’
Still The´oden did not answer. Whether he strove with anger or
doubt none could say. Eomer spoke.
´
‘Lord, hear me!’ he said. ‘Now we feel the peril that we were
warned of. Have we ridden forth to victory, only to stand at last
amazed by an old liar with honey on his forked tongue? So would

the trapped wolf speak to the hounds, if he could. What aid can he
give to you, forsooth? All he desires is to escape from his plight. But
will you parley with this dealer in treachery and murder? Remember
The´odred at the Fords, and the grave of Ha´ma in Helm’s Deep!’
‘If we speak of poisoned tongues what shall we say of yours, young
serpent?’ said Saruman, and the ﬂash of his anger was now plain to
´
´
see. ‘But come, Eomer, Eomund’s son!’ he went on in his soft voice
again. ‘To every man his part. Valour in arms is yours, and you win
high honour thereby. Slay whom your lord names as enemies, and
be content. Meddle not in policies which you do not understand.
But maybe, if you become a king, you will ﬁnd that he must choose
his friends with care. The friendship of Saruman and the power of
Orthanc cannot be lightly thrown aside, whatever grievances, real or
fancied, may lie behind. You have won a battle but not a war – and
that with help on which you cannot count again. You may ﬁnd the
Shadow of the Wood at your own door next: it is wayward, and
senseless, and has no love for Men.
‘But my lord of Rohan, am I to be called a murderer, because
valiant men have fallen in battle? If you go to war, needlessly, for I
did not desire it, then men will be slain. But if I am a murderer on
that account, then all the House of Eorl is stained with murder; for
they have fought many wars, and assailed many who deﬁed them.
Yet with some they have afterwards made peace, none the worse for
being politic. I say, The´oden King: shall we have peace and friend-
ship, you and I? It is ours to command.’
‘We will have peace,’ said The´oden at last thickly and with an
effort. Several of the Riders cried out gladly. The´oden held up his
hand. ‘Yes, we will have peace,’ he said, now in a clear voice, ‘we
will have peace, when you and all your works have perished – and
the works of your dark master to whom you would deliver us. You
are a liar, Saruman, and a corrupter of men’s hearts. You hold out
your hand to me, and I perceive only a ﬁnger of the claw of Mordor.
Cruel and cold! Even if your war on me was just – as it was not, for
were you ten times as wise you would have no right to rule me and
mine for your own proﬁt as you desired – even so, what will you say
of your torches in Westfold and the children that lie dead there? And
they hewed Ha´ma’s body before the gates of the Hornburg, after he
was dead. When you hang from a gibbet at your window for the sport
of your own crows, I will have peace with you and Orthanc. So much
for the House of Eorl. A lesser son of great sires am I, but I do not
need to lick your ﬁngers. Turn elsewhither. But I fear your voice has
lost its charm.’
The Riders gazed up at The´oden like men startled out of a dream.
Harsh as an old raven’s their master’s voice sounded in their ears

after the music of Saruman. But Saruman for a while was beside
himself with wrath. He leaned over the rail as if he would smite the
King with his staff. To some suddenly it seemed that they saw a
snake coiling itself to strike.
‘Gibbets and crows!’ he hissed, and they shuddered at the hideous
change. ‘Dotard! What is the house of Eorl but a thatched barn where
brigands drink in the reek, and their brats roll on the ﬂoor among
the dogs? Too long have they escaped the gibbet themselves. But the
noose comes, slow in the drawing, tight and hard in the end. Hang
if you will!’ Now his voice changed, as he slowly mastered himself.
‘I know not why I have had the patience to speak to you. For I need
you not, nor your little band of gallopers, as swift to ﬂy as to advance,
The´oden Horsemaster. Long ago I offered you a state beyond your
merit and your wit. I have offered it again, so that those whom you
mislead may clearly see the choice of roads. You give me brag and
abuse. So be it. Go back to your huts!
‘But you, Gandalf ! For you at least I am grieved, feeling for your
shame. How comes it that you can endure such company? For you
are proud, Gandalf – and not without reason, having a noble mind
and eyes that look both deep and far. Even now will you not listen
to my counsel?’
Gandalf stirred, and looked up. ‘What have you to say that you
did not say at our last meeting?’ he asked. ‘Or, perhaps, you have
things to unsay?’
Saruman paused. ‘Unsay?’ he mused, as if puzzled. ‘Unsay? I
endeavoured to advise you for your own good, but you scarcely
listened. You are proud and do not love advice, having indeed a
store of your own wisdom. But on that occasion you erred, I think,
misconstruing my intentions wilfully. I fear that in my eagerness to
persuade you, I lost patience. And indeed I regret it. For I bore you
no ill-will; and even now I bear none, though you return to me in
the company of the violent and the ignorant. How should I? Are we
not both members of a high and ancient order, most excellent in
Middle-earth? Our friendship would proﬁt us both alike. Much we
could still accomplish together, to heal the disorders of the world.
Let us understand one another, and dismiss from thought these lesser
folk! Let them wait on our decisions! For the common good I am
willing to redress the past, and to receive you. Will you not consult
with me? Will you not come up?’
So great was the power that Saruman exerted in this last effort
that none that stood within hearing were unmoved. But now the spell
was wholly different. They heard the gentle remonstrance of a kindly
king with an erring but much-loved minister. But they were shut out,
listening at a door to words not meant for them: ill-mannered children

or stupid servants overhearing the elusive discourse of their elders,
and wondering how it would affect their lot. Of loftier mould these
two were made: reverend and wise. It was inevitable that they should
make alliance. Gandalf would ascend into the tower, to discuss deep
things beyond their comprehension in the high chambers of Orthanc.
The door would be closed, and they would be left outside, dismissed
to await allotted work or punishment. Even in the mind of The´oden
the thought took shape, like a shadow of doubt: ‘He will betray us;
he will go – we shall be lost.’
Then Gandalf laughed. The fantasy vanished like a puff of smoke.
‘Saruman, Saruman!’ said Gandalf still laughing. ‘Saruman, you
missed your path in life. You should have been the king’s jester and
earned your bread, and stripes too, by mimicking his counsellors. Ah
me!’ he paused, getting the better of his mirth. ‘Understand one
another? I fear I am beyond your comprehension. But you, Saruman,
I understand now too well. I keep a clearer memory of your argu-
ments, and deeds, than you suppose. When last I visited you, you
were the jailor of Mordor, and there I was to be sent. Nay, the guest
who has escaped from the roof, will think twice before he comes back
in by the door. Nay, I do not think I will come up. But listen,
Saruman, for the last time! Will you not come down? Isengard has
proved less strong than your hope and fancy made it. So may other
things in which you still have trust. Would it not be well to leave it
for a while? To turn to new things, perhaps? Think well, Saruman!
Will you not come down?’
A shadow passed over Saruman’s face; then it went deathly white.
Before he could conceal it, they saw through the mask the anguish
of a mind in doubt, loathing to stay and dreading to leave its refuge.
For a second he hesitated, and no one breathed. Then he spoke,
and his voice was shrill and cold. Pride and hate were conquering
him.
‘Will I come down?’ he mocked. ‘Does an unarmed man come
down to speak with robbers out of doors? I can hear you well enough
here. I am no fool, and I do not trust you, Gandalf. They do not
stand openly on my stairs, but I know where the wild wood-demons
are lurking, at your command.’
‘The treacherous are ever distrustful,’ answered Gandalf wearily.
‘But you need not fear for your skin. I do not wish to kill you, or
hurt you, as you would know, if you really understood me. And I
have the power to protect you. I am giving you a last chance. You
can leave Orthanc, free – if you choose.’
‘That sounds well,’ sneered Saruman. ‘Very much in the manner
of Gandalf the Grey: so condescending, and so very kind. I do not
doubt that you would ﬁnd Orthanc commodious, and my departure

convenient. But why should I wish to leave? And what do you mean
by ‘‘free’’? There are conditions, I presume?’
‘Reasons for leaving you can see from your windows,’ answered
Gandalf. ‘Others will occur to your thought. Your servants are
destroyed and scattered; your neighbours you have made your
enemies; and you have cheated your new master, or tried to do so.
When his eye turns hither, it will be the red eye of wrath. But when
I say ‘‘free’’, I mean ‘‘free’’: free from bond, of chain or command:
to go where you will, even, even to Mordor, Saruman, if you desire.
But you will ﬁrst surrender to me the Key of Orthanc, and your staff.
They shall be pledges of your conduct, to be returned later, if you
merit them.’
Saruman’s face grew livid, twisted with rage, and a red light was
kindled in his eyes. He laughed wildly. ‘Later!’ he cried, and his
voice rose to a scream. ‘Later! Yes, when you also have the Keys of
Barad-duˆr itself, I suppose; and the crowns of seven kings, and the
rods of the Five Wizards, and have purchased yourself a pair of boots
many sizes larger than those that you wear now. A modest plan.
Hardly one in which my help is needed! I have other things to do.
Do not be a fool. If you wish to treat with me, while you have a
chance, go away, and come back when you are sober! And leave
behind these cut-throats and small rag-tag that dangle at your tail!
Good day!’ He turned and left the balcony.
‘Come back, Saruman!’ said Gandalf in a commanding voice. To
the amazement of the others, Saruman turned again, and as if dragged
against his will, he came slowly back to the iron rail, leaning on it,
breathing hard. His face was lined and shrunken. His hand clutched
his heavy black staff like a claw.
‘I did not give you leave to go,’ said Gandalf sternly. ‘I have not
ﬁnished. You have become a fool, Saruman, and yet pitiable. You
might still have turned away from folly and evil, and have been of
service. But you choose to stay and gnaw the ends of your old plots.
Stay then! But I warn you, you will not easily come out again. Not
unless the dark hands of the East stretch out to take you. Saruman!’
he cried, and his voice grew in power and authority. ‘Behold, I am
not Gandalf the Grey, whom you betrayed. I am Gandalf the White,
who has returned from death. You have no colour now, and I cast
you from the order and from the Council.’
He raised his hand, and spoke slowly in a clear cold voice.
‘Saruman, your staff is broken.’ There was a crack, and the staff split
asunder in Saruman’s hand, and the head of it fell down at Gandalf ’s
feet. ‘Go!’ said Gandalf. With a cry Saruman fell back and crawled
away. At that moment a heavy shining thing came hurtling down
from above. It glanced off the iron rail, even as Saruman left it, and

passing close to Gandalf ’s head, it smote the stair on which he stood.
The rail rang and snapped. The stair cracked and splintered in glitter-
ing sparks. But the ball was unharmed: it rolled on down the steps,
a globe of crystal, dark, but glowing with a heart of ﬁre. As it bounded
away towards a pool Pippin ran after it and picked it up.
‘The murderous rogue!’ cried Eomer. But Gandalf was unmoved.
´
‘No, that was not thrown by Saruman,’ he said; ‘nor even at his
bidding, I think. It came from a window far above. A parting shot
from Master Wormtongue, I fancy, but ill aimed.’
‘The aim was poor, maybe, because he could not make up his
mind which he hated more, you or Saruman,’ said Aragorn.
‘That may be so,’ said Gandalf. ‘Small comfort will those two
have in their companionship: they will gnaw one another with words.
But the punishment is just. If Wormtongue ever comes out of Orthanc
alive, it will be more than he deserves.
‘Here, my lad, I’ll take that! I did not ask you to handle it,’ he
cried, turning sharply and seeing Pippin coming up the steps, slowly,
as if he were bearing a great weight. He went down to meet him and
hastily took the dark globe from the hobbit, wrapping it in the folds
of his cloak. ‘I will take care of this,’ he said. ‘It is not a thing, I
guess, that Saruman would have chosen to cast away.’
‘But he may have other things to cast,’ said Gimli. ‘If that is the
end of the debate, let us go out of stone’s throw, at least!’
‘It is the end,’ said Gandalf. ‘Let us go.’
They turned their backs on the doors of Orthanc, and went down.
The riders hailed the king with joy, and saluted Gandalf. The spell
of Saruman was broken: they had seen him come at call, and crawl
away, dismissed.
‘Well, that is done,’ said Gandalf. ‘Now I must ﬁnd Treebeard
and tell him how things have gone.’
‘He will have guessed, surely?’ said Merry. ‘Were they likely to
end any other way?’
‘Not likely,’ answered Gandalf, ‘though they came to the balance
of a hair. But I had reasons for trying; some merciful and some less
so. First Saruman was shown that the power of his voice was waning.
He cannot be both tyrant and counsellor. When the plot is ripe it
remains no longer secret. Yet he fell into the trap, and tried to deal
with his victims piece-meal, while others listened. Then I gave him
a last choice and a fair one: to renounce both Mordor and his private
schemes, and make amends by helping us in our need. He knows
our need, none better. Great service he could have rendered. But he
has chosen to withhold it, and keep the power of Orthanc. He will
not serve, only command. He lives now in terror of the shadow of

Mordor, and yet he still dreams of riding the storm. Unhappy fool!
He will be devoured, if the power of the East stretches out its arms
to Isengard. We cannot destroy Orthanc from without, but Sauron
– who knows what he can do?’
‘And what if Sauron does not conquer? What will you do to him?’
asked Pippin.
‘I? Nothing!’ said Gandalf. ‘I will do nothing to him. I do not wish
for mastery. What will become of him? I cannot say. I grieve that so
much that was good now festers in the tower. Still for us things have
not gone badly. Strange are the turns of fortune! Often does hatred
hurt itself ! I guess that, even if we had entered in, we could have
found few treasures in Orthanc more precious than the thing which
Wormtongue threw down at us.’
A shrill shriek, suddenly cut off, came from an open window high
above.
‘It seems that Saruman thinks so too,’ said Gandalf. ‘Let us leave
them!’
They returned now to the ruins of the gate. Hardly had they passed
out under the arch, when, from among the shadows of the piled
stones where they had stood, Treebeard and a dozen other Ents came
striding up. Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas gazed at them in wonder.
‘Here are three of my companions, Treebeard,’ said Gandalf. ‘I
have spoken of them, but you have not yet seen them.’ He named
them one by one.
The Old Ent looked at them long and searchingly, and spoke to
them in turn. Last he turned to Legolas. ‘So you have come all the
way from Mirkwood, my good Elf ? A very great forest it used to be!’
‘And still is,’ said Legolas. ‘But not so great that we who dwell
there ever tire of seeing new trees. I should dearly love to journey in
Fangorn’s Wood. I scarcely passed beyond the eaves of it, and I did
not wish to turn back.’
Treebeard’s eyes gleamed with pleasure. ‘I hope you may have
your wish, ere the hills be much older,’ he said.
‘I will come, if I have the fortune,’ said Legolas. ‘I have made a
bargain with my friend that, if all goes well, we will visit Fangorn
together – by your leave.’
‘Any Elf that comes with you will be welcome,’ said Treebeard.
‘The friend I speak of is not an Elf,’ said Legolas; ‘I mean Gimli,
Glo´in’s son here.’ Gimli bowed low, and the axe slipped from his
belt and clattered on the ground.
‘Hoom, hm! Ah now,’ said Treebeard, looking dark-eyed at him.
‘A dwarf and an axe-bearer! Hoom! I have good will to Elves; but
you ask much. This is a strange friendship!’

‘Strange it may seem,’ said Legolas; ‘but while Gimli lives I shall
not come to Fangorn alone. His axe is not for trees, but for orc-necks,
O Fangorn, Master of Fangorn’s Wood. Forty-two he hewed in the
battle.’
‘Hoo! Come now!’ said Treebeard. ‘That is a better story! Well,
well, things will go as they will; and there is no need to hurry to meet
them. But now we must part for a while. Day is drawing to an end,
yet Gandalf says you must go ere nightfall, and the Lord of the Mark
is eager for his own house.’
‘Yes, we must go, and go now,’ said Gandalf. ‘I fear that I must
take your gatekeepers from you. But you will manage well enough
without them.’
‘Maybe I shall,’ said Treebeard. ‘But I shall miss them. We have
become friends in so short a while that I think I must be getting hasty
– growing backwards towards youth, perhaps. But there, they are the
ﬁrst new thing under Sun or Moon that I have seen for many a long,
long day. I shall not forget them. I have put their names into the
Long List. Ents will remember it.
Ents the earthborn, old as mountains,
the wide-walkers, water drinking;
and hungry as hunters, the Hobbit children,
the laughing-folk, the little people,
they shall remain friends as long as leaves are renewed. Fare you
well! But if you hear news up in your pleasant land, in the Shire,
send me word! You know what I mean: word or sight of the Entwives.
Come yourselves if you can!’
‘We will!’ said Merry and Pippin together, and they turned away
hastily. Treebeard looked at them, and was silent for a while, shaking
his head thoughtfully. Then he turned to Gandalf.
‘So Saruman would not leave?’ he said. ‘I did not think he would.
His heart is as rotten as a black Huorn’s. Still, if I were overcome
and all my trees destroyed, I would not come while I had one dark
hole left to hide in.’
‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘But you have not plotted to cover all the
world with your trees and choke all other living things. But there it
is, Saruman remains to nurse his hatred and weave again such webs
as he can. He has the Key of Orthanc. But he must not be allowed
to escape.’
‘Indeed no! Ents will see to that,’ said Treebeard. ‘Saruman shall
not set foot beyond the rock, without my leave. Ents will watch over
him.’
‘Good!’ said Gandalf. ‘That is what I hoped. Now I can go and

turn to other matters with one care the less. But you must be wary.
The waters have gone down. It will not be enough to put sentinels
round the tower, I fear. I do not doubt that there were deep ways
delved under Orthanc, and that Saruman hopes to go and come
unmarked, before long. If you will undertake the labour, I beg you
to pour in the waters again; and do so, until Isengard remains a
standing pool, or you discover the outlets. When all the underground
places are drowned, and the outlets blocked, then Saruman must
stay upstairs and look out of the windows.’
‘Leave it to the Ents!’ said Treebeard. ‘We shall search the valley
from head to foot and peer under every pebble. Trees are coming
back to live here, old trees, wild trees. The Watchwood we will call
it. Not a squirrel will go here, but I shall know of it. Leave it to Ents!
Until seven times the years in which he tormented us have passed,
we shall not tire of watching him.’

Chapter 11
´
T H E  P A L A N T I R
The sun was sinking behind the long western arm of the mountains
when Gandalf and his companions, and the king with his Riders, set
out again from Isengard. Gandalf took Merry behind him, and Ara-
gorn took Pippin. Two of the king’s men went on ahead, riding
swiftly, and passed soon out of sight down into the valley. The others
followed at an easy pace.
Ents in a solemn row stood like statues at the gate, with their long
arms uplifted, but they made no sound. Merry and Pippin looked back,
when they had passed some way down the winding road. Sunlight was
still shining in the sky, but long shadows reached over Isengard: grey
ruins falling into darkness. Treebeard stood alone there now, like the
distant stump of an old tree: the hobbits thought of their ﬁrst meeting,
upon the sunny ledge far away on the borders of Fangorn.
They came to the pillar of the White Hand. The pillar was still
standing, but the graven hand had been thrown down and broken
into small pieces. Right in the middle of the road the long foreﬁnger
lay, white in the dusk, its red nail darkening to black.
‘The Ents pay attention to every detail!’ said Gandalf.
They rode on, and evening deepened in the valley.
‘Are we riding far tonight, Gandalf ?’ asked Merry after a while. ‘I
don’t know how you feel with small rag-tag dangling behind you; but
the rag-tag is tired and will be glad to stop dangling and lie down.’
‘So you heard that?’ said Gandalf. ‘Don’t let it rankle! Be thankful
no longer words were aimed at you. He had his eyes on you. If it is
any comfort to your pride, I should say that, at the moment, you
and Pippin are more in his thoughts than all the rest of us. Who
you are; how you came there, and why; what you know; whether you
were captured, and if so, how you escaped when all the Orcs perished
– it is with those little riddles that the great mind of Saruman is
troubled. A sneer from him, Meriadoc, is a compliment, if you feel
honoured by his concern.’
‘Thank you!’ said Merry. ‘But it is a greater honour to dangle at
your tail, Gandalf. For one thing, in that position one has a chance
of putting a question a second time. Are we riding far tonight?’
Gandalf laughed. ‘A most unquenchable hobbit! All Wizards
should have a hobbit or two in their care – to teach them the meaning
of the word, and to correct them. I beg your pardon. But I have

given thought even to these simple matters. We will ride for a few
hours, gently, until we come to the end of the valley. Tomorrow we
must ride faster.
‘When we came, we meant to go straight from Isengard back to
the king’s house at Edoras over the plains, a ride of some days. But
we have taken thought and changed the plan. Messengers have gone
ahead to Helm’s Deep, to warn them that the king is returning
tomorrow. He will ride from there with many men to Dunharrow by
paths among the hills. From now on no more than two or three
together are to go openly over the land, by day or night, when it can
be avoided.’
‘Nothing or a double helping is your way!’ said Merry. ‘I am afraid
I was not looking beyond tonight’s bed. Where and what are Helm’s
Deep and all the rest of it? I don’t know anything about this country.’
‘Then you’d best learn something, if you wish to understand what
is happening. But not just now, and not from me: I have too many
pressing things to think about.’
‘All right, I’ll tackle Strider by the camp-ﬁre: he’s less testy. But
why all this secrecy? I thought we’d won the battle!’
‘Yes, we have won, but only the ﬁrst victory, and that in itself
increases our danger. There was some link between Isengard and
Mordor, which I have not yet fathomed. How they exchanged news
I am not sure; but they did so. The Eye of Barad-duˆr will be looking
impatiently towards the Wizard’s Vale, I think; and towards Rohan.
The less it sees the better.’
The road passed slowly, winding down the valley. Now further,
and now nearer Isen ﬂowed in its stony bed. Night came down from
the mountains. All the mists were gone. A chill wind blew. The moon,
now waxing round, ﬁlled the eastern sky with a pale cold sheen. The
shoulders of the mountain to their right sloped down to bare hills.
The wide plains opened grey before them.
At last they halted. Then they turned aside, leaving the highway
and taking to the sweet upland turf again. Going westward a mile or
so they came to a dale. It opened southward, leaning back into the
slope of round Dol Baran, the last hill of the northern ranges,
greenfooted, crowned with heather. The sides of the glen were shaggy
with last year’s bracken, among which the tight-curled fronds of
spring were just thrusting through the sweet-scented earth.
Thornbushes grew thick upon the low banks, and under them they
made their camp, two hours or so before the middle of the night.
They lit a ﬁre in a hollow, down among the roots of a spreading
hawthorn, tall as a tree, writhen with age, but hale in every limb.
Buds were swelling at each twig’s tip.

Guards were set, two at a watch. The rest, after they had supped,
wrapped themselves in a cloak and blanket and slept. The hobbits
lay in a corner by themselves upon a pile of old bracken. Merry
was sleepy, but Pippin now seemed curiously restless. The bracken
cracked and rustled, as he twisted and turned.
‘What’s the matter?’ asked Merry. ‘Are you lying on an ant-hill?’
‘No,’ said Pippin, ‘but I’m not comfortable. I wonder how long
it is since I slept in a bed?’
Merry yawned. ‘Work it out on your ﬁngers!’ he said. ‘But you
must know how long it is since we left Lo´ rien.’
‘Oh, that!’ said Pippin. ‘I mean a real bed in a bedroom.’
‘Well, Rivendell then,’ said Merry. ‘But I could sleep anywhere
tonight.’
‘You had the luck, Merry,’ said Pippin softly, after a pause. ‘You
were riding with Gandalf.’
‘Well, what of it?’
‘Did you get any news, any information out of him?’
‘Yes, a good deal. More than usual. But you heard it all or most
of it; you were close by, and we were talking no secrets. But you can
go with him tomorrow, if you think you can get more out of him –
and if he’ll have you.’
‘Can I? Good! But he’s close, isn’t he? Not changed at all.’
‘Oh yes, he is!’ said Merry, waking up a little, and beginning
to wonder what was bothering his companion. ‘He has grown, or
something. He can be both kinder and more alarming, merrier and
more solemn than before, I think. He has changed; but we have not
had a chance to see how much, yet. But think of the last part of that
business with Saruman! Remember Saruman was once Gandalf ’s
superior: head of the Council, whatever that may be exactly. He was
Saruman the White. Gandalf is the White now. Saruman came when
he was told, and his rod was taken; and then he was just told to go,
and he went!’
‘Well, if Gandalf has changed at all, then he’s closer than ever
that’s all,’ Pippin argued. ‘That—glass ball, now. He seemed mighty
pleased with it. He knows or guesses something about it. But does
he tell us what? No, not a word. Yet I picked it up, and I saved it
from rolling into a pool. Here, I’ll take that, my lad – that’s all. I
wonder what it is? It felt so very heavy.’ Pippin’s voice fell very low,
as if he was talking to himself.
‘Hullo!’ said Merry. ‘So that’s what is bothering you? Now, Pippin
my lad, don’t forget Gildor’s saying – the one Sam used to quote:
Do not meddle in the affairs of Wizards, for they are subtle and quick to
anger.’
‘But our whole life for months has been one long meddling in the

affairs of Wizards,’ said Pippin. ‘I should like a bit of information as
well as danger. I should like a look at that ball.’
‘Go to sleep!’ said Merry. ‘You’ll get information enough, sooner
or later. My dear Pippin, no Took ever beat a Brandybuck for inquisi-
tiveness; but is this the time, I ask you?’
‘All right! What’s the harm in my telling you what I should like:
a look at that stone? I know I can’t have it, with old Gandalf sitting
on it, like a hen on an egg. But it doesn’t help much to get no more
from you than a you-can’t-have-it so-go-to-sleep!’
‘Well, what else could I say?’ said Merry. ‘I’m sorry, Pippin, but
you really must wait till the morning. I’ll be as curious as you like
after breakfast, and I’ll help in any way I can at wizard-wheedling.
But I can’t keep awake any longer. If I yawn any more, I shall split
at the ears. Good night!’
Pippin said no more. He lay still now, but sleep remained far away;
and it was not encouraged by the sound of Merry breathing softly,
asleep in a few minutes after saying good night. The thought of the
dark globe seemed to grow stronger as all grew quiet. Pippin felt
again its weight in his hands, and saw again the mysterious red depths
into which he had looked for a moment. He tossed and turned and
tried to think of something else.
At last he could stand it no longer. He got up and looked round.
It was chilly, and he wrapped his cloak about him. The moon was
shining cold and white, down into the dell, and the shadows of the
bushes were black. All about lay sleeping shapes. The two guards
were not in view: they were up on the hill, perhaps, or hidden in the
bracken. Driven by some impulse that he did not understand, Pippin
walked softly to where Gandalf lay. He looked down at him. The
wizard seemed asleep, but with lids not fully closed: there was a
glitter of eyes under his long lashes. Pippin stepped back hastily. But
Gandalf made no sign; and drawn forward once more, half against
his will, the hobbit crept up again from behind the wizard’s head.
He was rolled in a blanket, with his cloak spread over the top; and
close beside him, between his right side and his bent arm, there was
a hummock, something round wrapped in a dark cloth; his hand
seemed only just to have slipped off it to the ground.
Hardly breathing, Pippin crept nearer, foot by foot. At last he
knelt down. Then he put his hands out stealthily, and slowly lifted
the lump up: it did not seem quite so heavy as he had expected.
‘Only some bundle of oddments, perhaps, after all,’ he thought with
a strange sense of relief; but he did not put the bundle down again.
He stood for a moment clasping it. Then an idea came into his mind.
He tiptoed away, found a large stone, and came back.

Quickly now he drew off the cloth, wrapped the stone in it and
kneeling down, laid it back by the wizard’s hand. Then at last he
looked at the thing that he had uncovered. There it was: a smooth
globe of crystal, now dark and dead, lying bare before his knees.
Pippin lifted it, covered it hurriedly in his own cloak, and half turned
to go back to his bed. At that moment Gandalf moved in his sleep,
and muttered some words: they seemed to be in a strange tongue;
his hand groped out and clasped the wrapped stone, then he sighed
and did not move again.
‘You idiotic fool!’ Pippin muttered to himself. ‘You’re going to
get yourself into frightful trouble. Put it back quick!’ But he found
now that his knees quaked, and he did not dare to go near enough
to the wizard to reach the bundle. ‘I’ll never get it back now without
waking him,’ he thought, ‘not till I’m a bit calmer. So I may as well
have a look ﬁrst. Not just here though!’ He stole away, and sat down
on a green hillock not far from his bed. The moon looked in over
the edge of the dell.
Pippin sat with his knees drawn up and the ball between them.
He bent low over it, looking like a greedy child stooping over a bowl
of food, in a corner away from others. He drew his cloak aside and
gazed at it. The air seemed still and tense about him. At ﬁrst the
globe was dark, black as jet, with the moonlight gleaming on its
surface. Then there came a faint glow and stir in the heart of it, and
it held his eyes, so that now he could not look away. Soon all the
inside seemed on ﬁre; the ball was spinning, or the lights within were
revolving. Suddenly the lights went out. He gave a gasp and struggled;
but he remained bent, clasping the ball with both hands. Closer and
closer he bent, and then became rigid; his lips moved soundlessly for
a while. Then with a strangled cry he fell back and lay still.
The cry was piercing. The guards leapt down from the banks. All
the camp was soon astir.
‘So this is the thief !’ said Gandalf. Hastily he cast his cloak over
the globe where it lay. ‘But you, Pippin! This is a grievous turn to
things!’ He knelt by Pippin’s body: the hobbit was lying on his back,
rigid, with unseeing eyes staring up at the sky. ‘The devilry! What
mischief has he done – to himself, and to all of us?’ The wizard’s
face was drawn and haggard.
He took Pippin’s hand and bent over his face, listening for his
breath; then he laid his hands on his brow. The hobbit shuddered.
His eyes closed. He cried out; and sat up, staring in bewilderment
at all the faces round him, pale in the moonlight.
‘It is not for you, Saruman!’ he cried in a shrill and toneless voice,
shrinking away from Gandalf. ‘I will send for it at once. Do you

understand? Say just that!’ Then he struggled to get up and escape,
but Gandalf held him gently and ﬁrmly.
‘Peregrin Took!’ he said. ‘Come back!’
The hobbit relaxed and fell back, clinging to the wizard’s hand.
‘Gandalf !’ he cried. ‘Gandalf ! Forgive me!’
‘Forgive you?’ said the wizard. ‘Tell me ﬁrst what you have done!’
‘I, I took the ball and looked at it,’ stammered Pippin; ‘and I saw
things that frightened me. And I wanted to go away, but I couldn’t.
And then he came and questioned me; and he looked at me, and,
and, that is all I remember.’
‘That won’t do,’ said Gandalf sternly. ‘What did you see, and
what did you say?’
Pippin shut his eyes and shivered, but said nothing. They all stared
at him in silence, except Merry who turned away. But Gandalf ’s face
was still hard. ‘Speak!’ he said.
In a low hesitating voice Pippin began again, and slowly his words
grew clearer and stronger. ‘I saw a dark sky, and tall battlements,’
he said. ‘And tiny stars. It seemed very far away and long ago, yet
hard and clear. Then the stars went in and out – they were cut off
by things with wings. Very big, I think, really; but in the glass they
looked like bats wheeling round the tower. I thought there were nine
of them. One began to ﬂy straight towards me, getting bigger and
bigger. It had a horrible – no, no! I can’t say.
‘I tried to get away, because I thought it would ﬂy out; but when
it had covered all the globe, it disappeared. Then he came. He did not
speak so that I could hear words. He just looked, and I understood.
‘ ‘‘So you have come back? Why have you neglected to report for
so long?’’
‘I did not answer. He said: ‘‘Who are you?’’ I still did not answer,
but it hurt me horribly; and he pressed me, so I said: ‘‘A hobbit.’’
‘Then suddenly he seemed to see me, and he laughed at me. It
was cruel. It was like being stabbed with knives. I struggled. But he
said: ‘‘Wait a moment! We shall meet again soon. Tell Saruman that
this dainty is not for him. I will send for it at once. Do you understand?
Say just that!’’
‘Then he gloated over me. I felt I was falling to pieces. No, no! I
can’t say any more. I don’t remember anything else.’
‘Look at me!’ said Gandalf.
Pippin looked up straight into his eyes. The wizard held his gaze
for a moment in silence. Then his face grew gentler, and the shadow
of a smile appeared. He laid his hand softly on Pippin’s head.
‘All right!’ he said. ‘Say no more! You have taken no harm. There
is no lie in your eyes, as I feared. But he did not speak long with
you. A fool, but an honest fool, you remain, Peregrin Took. Wiser

ones might have done worse in such a pass. But mark this! You have
been saved, and all your friends too, mainly by good fortune, as it is
called. You cannot count on it a second time. If he had questioned
you, then and there, almost certainly you would have told all that
you know, to the ruin of us all. But he was too eager. He did not
want information only: he wanted you, quickly, so that he could deal
with you in the Dark Tower, slowly. Don’t shudder! If you will
meddle in the affairs of Wizards, you must be prepared to think of
such things. But come! I forgive you. Be comforted! Things have not
turned out as evilly as they might.’
He lifted Pippin gently and carried him back to his bed. Merry
followed, and sat down beside him. ‘Lie there and rest, if you can,
Pippin!’ said Gandalf. ‘Trust me. If you feel an itch in your palms
again, tell me of it! Such things can be cured. But anyway, my dear
hobbit, don’t put a lump of rock under my elbow again! Now, I will
leave you two together for a while.’
With that Gandalf returned to the others, who were still standing
by the Orthanc-stone in troubled thought. ‘Peril comes in the night
when least expected,’ he said. ‘We have had a narrow escape!’
‘How is the hobbit, Pippin?’ asked Aragorn.
‘I think all will be well now,’ answered Gandalf. ‘He was not held
long, and hobbits have an amazing power of recovery. The memory,
or the horror of it, will probably fade quickly. Too quickly, perhaps.
Will you, Aragorn, take the Orthanc-stone and guard it? It is a danger-
ous charge.’
‘Dangerous indeed, but not to all,’ said Aragorn. ‘There is one
who may claim it by right. For this assuredly is the palantı´r of Orthanc
from the treasury of Elendil, set here by the Kings of Gondor. Now
my hour draws near. I will take it.’
Gandalf looked at Aragorn, and then, to the surprise of the others,
he lifted the covered Stone, and bowed as he presented it.
‘Receive it, lord!’ he said: ‘in earnest of other things that shall be
given back. But if I may counsel you in the use of your own, do not
use it – yet! Be wary!’
‘When have I been hasty or unwary, who have waited and prepared
for so many long years?’ said Aragorn.
‘Never yet. Do not then stumble at the end of the road,’ answered
Gandalf. ‘But at the least keep this thing secret. You, and all others
that stand here! The hobbit, Peregrin, above all should not know
where it is bestowed. The evil ﬁt may come on him again. For alas!
he has handled it and looked in it, as should never have happened.
He ought never to have touched it in Isengard, and there I should
have been quicker. But my mind was bent on Saruman, and I did

not at once guess the nature of the Stone. Then I was weary, and as
I lay pondering it, sleep overcame me. Now I know!’
‘Yes, there can be no doubt,’ said Aragorn. ‘At last we know the
link between Isengard and Mordor, and how it worked. Much is
explained.’
‘Strange powers have our enemies, and strange weaknesses!’ said
The´oden. ‘But it has long been said: oft evil will shall evil mar.’
‘That many times is seen,’ said Gandalf. ‘But at this time we have
been strangely fortunate. Maybe, I have been saved by this hobbit
from a grave blunder. I had considered whether or not to probe this
Stone myself to ﬁnd its uses. Had I done so, I should have been
revealed to him myself. I am not ready for such a trial, if indeed I
shall ever be so. But even if I found the power to withdraw myself,
it would be disastrous for him to see me, yet – until the hour comes
when secrecy will avail no longer.’
‘That hour is now come, I think,’ said Aragorn.
‘Not yet,’ said Gandalf. ‘There remains a short while of doubt,
which we must use. The Enemy, it is clear, thought that the Stone
was in Orthanc – why should he not? And that therefore the hobbit
was captive there, driven to look in the glass for his torment by
Saruman. That dark mind will be ﬁlled now with the voice and face
of the hobbit and with expectation: it may take some time before he
learns his error. We must snatch that time. We have been too
leisurely. We must move. The neighbourhood of Isengard is no place
now to linger in. I will ride ahead at once with Peregrin Took. It will
be better for him than lying in the dark while others sleep.’
´
‘I will keep Eomer and ten Riders,’ said the king. ‘They shall ride
with me at early day. The rest may go with Aragorn and ride as soon
as they have a mind.’
‘As you will,’ said Gandalf. ‘But make all the speed you may to
the cover of the hills, to Helm’s Deep!’
At that moment a shadow fell over them. The bright moonlight
seemed to be suddenly cut off. Several of the Riders cried out, and
crouched, holding their arms above their heads, as if to ward off a blow
from above: a blind fear and a deadly cold fell on them. Cowering they
looked up. A vast winged shape passed over the moon like a black cloud.
It wheeled and went north, ﬂying at a speed greater than any wind of
Middle-earth. The stars fainted before it. It was gone.
They stood up, rigid as stones. Gandalf was gazing up, his arms
out and downwards, stiff, his hands clenched.
‘Nazguˆl!’ he cried. ‘The messenger of Mordor. The storm is
coming. The Nazguˆl have crossed the River! Ride, ride! Wait not for
the dawn! Let not the swift wait for the slow! Ride!’

He sprang away, calling Shadowfax as he ran. Aragorn followed
him. Going to Pippin, Gandalf picked him up in his arms. ‘You shall
come with me this time,’ he said. ‘Shadowfax shall show you his
paces.’ Then he ran to the place where he had slept. Shadowfax stood
there already. Slinging the small bag which was all his luggage across
his shoulders, the wizard leapt upon the horse’s back. Aragorn lifted
Pippin and set him in Gandalf ’s arms, wrapped in cloak and blanket.
‘Farewell! Follow fast!’ cried Gandalf. ‘Away, Shadowfax!’
The great horse tossed his head. His ﬂowing tail ﬂicked in the
moonlight. Then he leapt forward, spurning the earth, and was gone
like the north wind from the mountains.
‘A beautiful, restful night!’ said Merry to Aragorn. ‘Some folk have
wonderful luck. He did not want to sleep, and he wanted to ride
with Gandalf – and there he goes! Instead of being turned into a
stone himself to stand here for ever as a warning.’
‘If you had been the ﬁrst to lift the Orthanc-stone, and not he,
how would it be now?’ said Aragorn. ‘You might have done worse.
Who can say? But now it is your luck to come with me, I fear. At
once. Go and get ready, and bring anything that Pippin left behind.
Make haste!’
Over the plains Shadowfax was ﬂying, needing no urging and no
guidance. Less than an hour had passed, and they had reached the
Fords of Isen and crossed them. The Mound of the Riders and its
cold spears lay grey behind them.
Pippin was recovering. He was warm, but the wind in his face was
keen and refreshing. He was with Gandalf. The horror of the Stone
and of the hideous shadow over the moon was fading, things left
behind in the mists of the mountains or in a passing dream. He drew
a deep breath.
‘I did not know you rode bare-back, Gandalf,’ he said. ‘You
haven’t a saddle or a bridle!’
‘I do not ride elf-fashion, except on Shadowfax,’ said Gandalf.
‘But Shadowfax will have no harness. You do not ride Shadowfax:
he is willing to carry you – or not. If he is willing, that is enough. It
is then his business to see that you remain on his back, unless you
jump off into the air.’
‘How fast is he going?’ asked Pippin. ‘Fast by the wind, but very
smooth. And how light his footfalls are!’
‘He is running now as fast as the swiftest horse could gallop,’
answered Gandalf; ‘but that is not fast for him. The land is rising a
little here, and is more broken than it was beyond the river. But see
how the White Mountains are drawing near under the stars! Yonder

are the Thrihyrne peaks like black spears. It will not be long before
we reach the branching roads and come to the Deeping-coomb, where
the battle was fought two nights ago.’
Pippin was silent again for a while. He heard Gandalf singing softly
to himself, murmuring brief snatches of rhyme in many tongues, as
the miles ran under them. At last the wizard passed into a song of
which the hobbit caught the words: a few lines came clear to his ears
through the rushing of the wind:
Tall ships and tall kings
Three times three,
What brought they from the foundered land
Over the ﬂowing sea?
Seven stars and seven stones
And one white tree.
‘What are you saying, Gandalf ?’ asked Pippin.
‘I was just running over some of the Rhymes of Lore in my mind,’
answered the wizard. ‘Hobbits, I suppose, have forgotten them, even
those that they ever knew.’
‘No, not all,’ said Pippin. ‘And we have many of our own, which
wouldn’t interest you, perhaps. But I have never heard this one. What
is it about – the seven stars and seven stones?’
‘About the palantı´ri of the Kings of Old,’ said Gandalf.
‘And what are they?’
‘The name meant that which looks far away. The Orthanc-stone
was one.’
